Project Gutenberg's The Secret Cache, by E. C. [Ethel Claire] Brill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Secret Cache
       An Adventure and Mystery Story for Boys

Author: E. C. [Ethel Claire] Brill

Illustrator: W. H. Wolf

Release Date: July 24, 2013 [EBook #43293]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET CACHE ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Rod Crawford, Dave Morgan
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






“MONGA LOOKED BACK ONCE JUST IN TIME TO SEE ONE OF THE GIANTS SPRING UP
                           OUT OF THE ROCKS.”
                 “The Secret Cache.”    (See Page 277)




                                  THE
                                 SECRET
                                 CACHE


                        AN ADVENTURE AND MYSTERY
                             STORY FOR BOYS

                                   BY
                              E. C. BRILL

                             _ILLUSTRATED_

                         CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY
                         PUBLISHERS    NEW YORK

                         ADVENTURE AND MYSTERY
                            STORIES FOR BOYS


                            _By_ E. C. BRILL


                 Large 12 mo.    Cloth.    Illustrated.


                            THE SECRET CACHE
                         SOUTH FROM HUDSON BAY
                       THE ISLAND OF YELLOW SANDS


                          Copyright, 1932, by
                         Cupples & Leon Company
                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.




                                CONTENTS


  I. The Birch Bark Letter                                             7
  II. The Sloop “Otter”                                               14
  III. Driven Before the Gale                                         22
  IV. The Isle Royale                                                 29
  V. The Half-Breed Brother                                           37
  VI. Down the Northwest Shore                                        46
  VII. At Wauswaugoning                                               55
  VIII. The Blood-Stained Tunic                                       62
  IX. The Giant Iroquois                                              70
  X. The Looming Sailboat                                             77
  XI. The Fire-Lit Orgy                                               85
  XII. The Hungry Porcupine                                           92
  XIII. The Painted Thwart                                           100
  XIV. Sailing Towards the Sunrise                                   110
  XV. The Rift in the Rock                                           117
  XVI. The Cache                                                     127
  XVII. The Sealed Packet                                            137
  XVIII. The Fleeing Canoe                                           147
  XIX. The Bay of Manitos                                            156
  XX. Hugh Climbs the Ridge                                          164
  XXI. The Grinning Indian                                           172
  XXII. Blaise Follows Hugh’s Trail                                  178
  XXIII. A Captive                                                   185
  XXIV. In the Hands of the Giant                                    193
  XXV. The Chief of Minong                                           201
  XXVI. Escape                                                       209
  XXVII. What Blaise Overheard                                       217
  XXVIII. Confusing the Trail                                        223
  XXIX. The Cedar Barrier                                            234
  XXX. The Flight From Minong                                        242
  XXXI. With Wind and Waves                                          249
  XXXII. The Fire at the End of the Trail                            256
  XXXIII. The Capture of Monga                                       264
  XXXIV. Monga’s Story                                               272
  XXXV. The Fall of the Giant                                        280
  XXXVI. How Blaise Missed His Revenge                               290
  XXXVII. The Packet is Opened                                       297




                            THE SECRET CACHE




                                   I
                         THE BIRCH BARK LETTER


On the river bank a boy sat watching the slender birch canoes bobbing
about in the swift current. The fresh wind reddened his cheeks and the
roaring of the rapids filled his ears. Eagerly his eyes followed the
movements of the canoes daringly poised in the stream just below the
tossing, foaming, white water. It was the first day of the spring
fishing, and more exciting sport than this Indian white-fishing Hugh
Beaupré had never seen. Three canoes were engaged in the fascinating
game, two Indians in each. One knelt in the stern with his paddle. The
other stood erect in the bow, a slender pole fully ten feet long in his
hands, balancing with extraordinary skill as the frail craft pitched
about in the racing current.

The standing Indian in the nearest canoe was a fine figure of a young
man, in close-fitting buckskin leggings, his slender, muscular, bronze
body stripped to the waist. Above his black head, bent a little as he
gazed intently down into the clear water, gulls wheeled and screamed in
anger at the invasion of their fishing ground. Suddenly the fisherman
pointed, with a swift movement of his left hand, to the spot where his
keen eyes had caught the gleam of a fin. Instantly his companion
responded to the signal. With a quick dig and twist of the paddle blade,
he shot the canoe forward at an angle. Down went the scoop net on the end
of the long pole and up in one movement. A dexterous flirt of the net,
and the fish, its wet, silvery sides gleaming in the sun, landed in the
bottom of the boat.

The lad on the bank had been holding his breath. Now his tense
watchfulness relaxed, and he glanced farther up-stream at the white water
boiling over and around the black rocks. A gleam of bright red among the
bushes along the shore caught his eye. The tip of a scarlet cap, then a
head, appeared above the budding alders, as a man came, with swift,
swinging strides, along the shore path.

“Holá, Hugh Beaupré,” he cried, when he was close enough to be heard
above the tumult of the rapids. “M’sieu Cadotte, he want you.”

The lad scrambled to his feet. “Monsieur Cadotte sent you for me?” he
asked in surprise. “What does he want with me, Baptiste?”

“A messenger from the New Fort has come, but a few moments ago,” Baptiste
replied, this time in French.

Hugh, half French himself, understood that language well, though he spoke
it less fluently than English.

“From the Kaministikwia? He has brought news of my father?”

“That M’sieu did not tell me, but yes, I think it may be so, since M’sieu
sends for you.”

Hugh had scarcely waited for an answer. Before Baptiste had finished his
speech, the boy was running along the river path. The French Canadian
strode after, the tassel of his cap bobbing, the ends of his scarlet sash
streaming in the brisk breeze.

Hastening past the small cabins that faced the St. Mary’s River, Hugh
turned towards a larger building, like the others of rough, unbarked
logs. Here he knew he should find Monsieur Cadotte, fur trader and agent
for the Northwest Fur Company. Finding the door open, the lad entered
without ceremony.

Monsieur Cadotte was alone, going through for a second time the reports
and letters the half-breed messenger had brought from the Company’s
headquarters on the River Kaministikwia at the farther end of Lake
Superior. The trader looked up as the boy entered.

“A letter for you, Hugh.” He lifted a packet from the rude table.

“From my father?” came the eager question.

“That I do not know, but no doubt it will give you news of him.”

A strange looking letter Cadotte handed the lad, a thin packet of birch
bark tied about with rough cedar cord. On the outer wrapping the name
“Hugh Beaupré” was written in a brownish fluid. Hugh cut the cord and
removed the wrapper. His first glance at the thin squares of white,
papery bark showed him that the writing was not his father’s. The letter
was in French, in the same muddy brown ink as the address. The
handwriting was good, better than the elder Beaupré’s, and the spelling
not so bad as Hugh’s own when he attempted to write French. He had little
difficulty in making out the meaning.

  “My brother,” the letter began, “our father, before he died, bade me
  write to you at the Sault de Ste. Marie. In March he left the Lake of
  Red Cedars with one comrade and two dog sleds laden with furs. At the
  Fond du Lac he put sail to a bateau, and with the furs he started for
  the Grand Portage. But wind and rain came and the white fog. He knew
  not where he was and the waves bore him on the rocks. He escaped
  drowning and came at last to the Grand Portage and Wauswaugoning. But
  he was sore hurt in the head and the side, and before the setting of
  the sun his spirit had left his body. While he could yet speak he told
  me of you, my half-brother, and bade me write to you. He bade me tell
  you of the furs and of a packet of value hid in a safe place near the
  wreck of the bateau. He told me that the furs are for you and me. He
  said you and I must get them and take them to the New Northwest Company
  at the Kaministikwia. The packet you must bear to a man in Montreal.
  Our father bade us keep silence and go quickly. He had enemies, as well
  I know. So, my brother, I bid you come as swiftly as you can to the
  Kaministikwia, where I will await you.

                              Thy half-brother,
                           Blaise Beaupré or Attekonse, Little Caribou.”

Hugh read the strange letter to the end, then turned back to the first
bark sheet to read again. He had reached the last page a second time when
Cadotte’s voice aroused him from his absorption.

“It is bad news?” the trader asked.

“Yes,” Hugh answered, raising his eyes from the letter. “My father is
dead.”

“Bad news in truth.” Cadotte’s voice was vibrant with sympathy. “It was
not, I hope, _la petite vérole_?” His despatches had informed him that
the dreaded smallpox had broken out among the Indian villages west of
Superior.

“No, he was wrecked.” Hugh hesitated, then continued, “On his spring trip
down his boat went on the rocks, and he was so sorely hurt that he lived
but a short time.”

“A sad accident truly. Believe me, I feel for you, my boy. If there is
anything I can do——” Cadotte broke off, then added, “You will wish to
return to your relatives. We must arrange to send you to Michilimackinac
on the schooner. From there you can readily find a way of return to
Montreal.”

Hugh was at a loss for a reply. He had not the slightest intention of
returning to Montreal so soon. He must obey his half-brother’s summons
and go to recover the furs and the packet that made up the lads’ joint
inheritance. Kind though Cadotte had been, Hugh dared not tell him all.
“He bade us keep silence,” Little Caribou had written, and one word in
the letter disclosed to Hugh a good reason for silence.

Jean Beaupré had been a free trader and trapper, doing business with the
Indians on his own account, not in the direct service of any company.
Hugh knew, however, that his father had been in the habit of buying his
supplies from and selling his pelts to the Old Northwest Company. Very
likely he had been under some contract to do so. Yet in these last
instructions to his sons, he bade them take the furs to the _New_
Northwest Company, a secession from and rival to the old organization. He
must have had some disagreement, an actual quarrel perhaps, with the Old
Company. The rivalry between the fur companies was hot and bitter. Hugh
was very sure that if Monsieur Cadotte learned of the hidden pelts, he
would inform his superiors. Then, in all probability, the Old Northwest
Company’s men would reach the cache first. Certainly, if he even
suspected that the pelts were destined for the New Company, Cadotte would
do nothing to further and everything to hinder Hugh’s project. The boy
was in a difficult position. He had to make up his mind quickly. Cadotte
was eying him sharply and curiously.

“I cannot return to Montreal just yet, Monsieur Cadotte,” Hugh said at
last. “This letter is from my half-brother.” He paused in embarrassment.

Cadotte nodded and waited for the boy to go on. The trader knew that Jean
Beaupré had an Indian wife, and supposed that Hugh had known it also.
Part Indian himself, Cadotte could never have understood the lad’s
amazement and consternation at learning now, for the first time, of his
half-brother.

“My father,” Hugh went on, “bade Blaise, my half-brother, tell me to—come
to the Kaministikwia and meet Blaise there. He wished me to—to make my
brother’s acquaintance and—and receive from him—something my father left
me,” he concluded lamely.

Cadotte was regarding Hugh keenly. The boy’s embarrassed manner was
enough to make him suspect that Hugh was not telling the truth. Cadotte
shrugged his shoulders. “It may be difficult to send you in that
direction. If you were an experienced canoeman, but you are not and——”

“But I _must_ go,” Hugh broke in. “My father bade me, and you wouldn’t
have me disobey his last command. Can’t I go in the _Otter_? I still have
some of the money my aunt gave me. If I am not sailor enough to work my
way, I can pay for my passage.”

“Eh bien, we will see what can be done,” Cadotte replied more kindly.
Perhaps the lad’s earnestness and distress had convinced him that Hugh
had some more urgent reason than a mere boyish desire for adventure, for
making the trip. “I will see if matters can be arranged.”




                                   II
                           THE SLOOP “OTTER”


His mind awhirl with conflicting thoughts and feelings, Hugh Beaupré left
Cadotte. The preceding autumn Hugh had come from Montreal to the Sault de
Ste. Marie. Very reluctantly his aunt had let him go to be with his
father in the western wilderness for a year or two of that rough,
adventurous life. Hugh’s Scotch mother had died when he was less than a
year old, nearly sixteen years before the opening of this story. His
French father, a restless man of venturesome spirit, had left the child
with the mother’s sister, and had taken to the woods, the then untamed
wilderness of the upper Great Lakes and the country beyond. In fifteen
years he had been to Montreal to see his son but three times. During each
brief stay, his stories of the west had been eagerly listened to by the
growing boy. On his father’s last visit to civilization, Hugh had begged
to be allowed to go back to Lake Superior with him. The elder Beaupré,
thinking the lad too young, had put him off. He had consented, however,
to his son’s joining him at the Sault de Ste. Marie a year from the
following autumn, when Hugh would be sixteen.

Delayed by bad weather, the boy had arrived at the meeting place late,
only to find that his father had not been seen at the Sault since his
brief stop on his return from Montreal the year before. The disappointed
lad tried to wait patiently, but the elder Beaupré did not come or send
any message. At last, word arrived that he had left the Grand Portage, at
the other end of Lake Superior, some weeks before, not to come to the
Sault but to go in the opposite direction to his winter trading ground
west of the lake. There was no chance for Hugh to follow, even had he
known just where his father intended to winter. By another trader going
west and by a Northwest Company messenger, the boy sent letters, hoping
that in some manner they might reach Jean Beaupré. All winter Hugh had
remained at the Sault waiting for some reply, but none of any sort had
come until the arrival of the strange packet he was now carrying in his
hand. This message from his younger brother seemed to prove that his
father must have received at least one of Hugh’s letters. Otherwise he
would not have known that his elder son was at the Sault. But there was
no explanation of Jean Beaupré’s failure to meet the boy there.

Hugh was grieved to learn of his parent’s death, but he could not feel
the deep sorrow that would have overwhelmed him at the loss of an
intimately known and well loved father. Jean Beaupré was almost a
stranger to his older son. Hugh remembered seeing him but the three times
and receiving but one letter from him. Indeed he was little more than a
casual acquaintance whose tales of adventure had kindled a boy’s
imagination. It was scarcely possible that Hugh’s grief could be deep,
and, for the time being, it was overshadowed by other feelings. He had
been suddenly plunged, it seemed, into a strange and unexpected
adventure, which filled his mind to the exclusion of all else.

He must find some way to reach the Kaministikwia River, there to join his
newly discovered Indian brother in a search for the wrecked bateau and
its cargo of pelts. Of that half-brother Hugh had never heard before. He
could not but feel a sense of resentment that there should be such a
person. The boy had been brought up to believe that his father had loved
his bonny Scotch wife devotedly, and that it was his inconsolable grief
at her death that had driven him to the wilderness. It seemed, however,
that he must have consoled himself rather quickly with an Indian squaw.
Surely the lad who had written the letter must be well grown, not many
years younger than Hugh himself.

As he walked slowly along the river bank, Hugh turned the bark packet
over and over in his hand, and wondered about the half-breed boy who was
to be his comrade in adventure. Attekonse had not spent his whole life in
the woods, that was evident. Somewhere he had received an education, had
learned to write French readily and in a good hand. Perhaps his father
had taught him, thought Hugh, but quickly dismissed that suggestion. He
doubted if the restless Jean Beaupré would have had the patience, even if
he had had the knowledge and ability to teach his young son to write
French so well.

Uncertain what he ought to do next, the puzzled boy wandered along,
glancing now and then at the canoes engaged in the white-fishing below
the rapids. That daring sport had lost its interest for him. At the
outskirts of an Indian village, where he was obliged to beat off with a
stick a pack of snarling, wolf-like dogs, he turned and went back the way
he had come, still pondering over the birch bark letter.

Presently he caught sight once more of Baptiste’s scarlet cap. No message
from Cadotte had brought the simple fellow this time, merely his own
curiosity. Hugh was quite willing to answer Baptiste’s questions so far
as he could without betraying too much. Seated in a sheltered, sunny spot
on an outcrop of rock at the river’s edge, he told of his father’s death.
Then, suddenly, he resolved to ask the good-natured Canadian’s help.

“Baptiste, I am in a difficulty. My half-brother who wrote this,”—Hugh
touched the bark packet—“bids me join him at the Kaministikwia. It was my
father’s last command that I should go there and meet this Blaise or
Little Caribou, as he calls himself. We are to divide the things father
left for us.”

“There is an inheritance then?” questioned Baptiste, interested at once.

“Nothing that amounts to much, I fancy,” the lad replied with an
assumption of carelessness; “some personal belongings, a few pelts
perhaps. For some reason he wished Blaise and me to meet and divide them.
It is a long journey for such a matter.”

“Ah, but a dying father’s command!” cried Baptiste. “You must not disobey
that. To disregard the wishes of the dead is a grievous sin, and would
surely bring you misfortune.”

“True, but what can I do, Baptiste? Monsieur Cadotte doesn’t feel greatly
inclined to help me. He wishes me to return to Montreal. How then am I to
find an opportunity to go to the Kaministikwia?”

Baptiste took a long, thoughtful pull at his pipe, then removed it from
his mouth. “There is the sloop _Otter_,” he suggested.

“Would Captain Bennett take me, do you think?”

“I myself go as one of the crew. To-morrow early I go to Point aux Pins.
Come with me and we shall see.”

“Gladly,” exclaimed Hugh. “When does she sail?”

“Soon, I think. There were repairs to the hull, where she ran on the
rocks, but they are finished. Then there is new rigging and the painting.
It will not be long until she is ready.”

That night Hugh debated in his own mind whether he should tell Cadotte of
his proposed visit with Baptiste to Point aux Pins. He decided against
mentioning it at present. He did not know what news might have come in
Cadotte’s despatches, whether the trader was aware of the elder Beaupré’s
change of allegiance. At any rate, thought the lad, it would be better to
have his passage in the _Otter_ arranged for, if he could persuade her
captain, before saying anything more to anyone.

Early the next morning Baptiste and Hugh embarked above the rapids in
Baptiste’s small birch canoe. The distance to Point aux Pins was short,
but paddling, even in the more sluggish channels, against the current of
the St. Mary’s River in spring flood was strenuous work, as Hugh,
wielding the bow blade, soon discovered. Signs of spring were everywhere.
The snow was gone, and flocks of small, migrating birds were flitting and
twittering among the trees and now and then bursting into snatches of
song. The leaves of birches, willows and alders were beginning to unfold,
the shores showing a faint mist of pale green, though here and there in
the quiet backwaters among rocks and on the north sides of islands, ice
still remained.

At Point aux Pins, or Pine Point, was the Northwest Company’s shipyard.
In a safe and well sheltered harbor, formed by the long point that ran
out into the river, the sailing vessels belonging to the company were
built and repaired. The sloop _Otter_, which had spent the winter there,
was now anchored a little way out from shore. The repairs had been
completed and a fresh coat of white paint was being applied to her hull.
Tents and rude cabins on the sandy ground among scrubby jack pines and
willows housed the workers, and near by, waiting for the fish cleanings
and other refuse to be thrown out, a flock of gulls, gray-winged, with
gleaming white heads and necks, rode the water like a fleet of little
boats. As the canoe approached, the birds, with a splashing and beating
of wings, rose, whirled about in the air, and alighted again farther out,
each, as it struck the water, poising for a moment with black-tipped
wings raised and half spread.

On a stretch of sand beyond the shipyard, Baptiste and Hugh landed,
stepping out, one on each side, the moment the canoe touched, lifting it
from the water and carrying it ashore. Then they sought the master of the
sloop.

Captain Bennett was personally superintending the work on his ship. To
him Baptiste, who had been previously engaged as one of the small crew,
made known Hugh’s wish to sail to the Kaministikwia. The shipmaster
turned sharply on the lad, demanding to know his purpose in crossing the
lake. Hugh explained as well as he could, without betraying more than he
had already told Cadotte and Baptiste.

“Do you know anything of working a ship?” Captain Bennett asked.

“I have sailed a skiff on the St. Lawrence,” was the boy’s reply. “I can
learn and I can obey orders.”

“Um,” grunted the Captain. “At least you are a white man. I can use one
more man, and I don’t want an Indian. I can put you to work now. If you
prove good for anything, I will engage you for the trip over. Here,
Duncan,” to a strapping, red-haired Scot, “give these fellows something
to do.”

So it came about that Hugh Beaupré, instead of going back at once to the
Sault, remained at the Point aux Pins shipyard. He returned in the
_Otter_, when, three days later, she sailed down the St. Mary’s to the
dock above the rapids where she was to receive her lading. In the
meantime, by an Indian boy, Hugh had sent a message to Cadotte informing
him that he, Hugh Beaupré, had been accepted as one of the crew of the
_Otter_ for her trip to the Kaministikwia. Cadotte had returned no reply,
so Hugh judged that the trader did not intend to put any obstacles in the
way of his adventure.

The goods the sloop was to transport had been received the preceding
autumn by ship from Michilimackinac too late to be forwarded across
Superior. They were to be sent on now by the _Otter_. A second Northwest
Company ship, the _Invincible_, which had wintered in Thunder Bay, was
expected at the Sault in a few weeks. When the great canoe fleet from
Montreal should arrive in June, part of the goods brought would be
transferred to the _Invincible_, while the remainder would be taken on in
the canoes. Hugh was heartily glad that he was not obliged to wait for
the fleet. In all probability there would be no vacant places, and if
there were any, he doubted if, with his limited experience as a canoeman,
he would be accepted. He felt himself lucky to obtain a passage on the
_Otter_.

The sloop was of only seventy-five tons burden, but the time of loading
was a busy one. The cargo was varied: provisions, consisting largely of
corn, salt pork and kegs of tried out grease, with some wheat flour,
butter, sugar, tea and other luxuries for the clerks at the
Kaministikwia; powder and shot; and articles for the Indian trade,
blankets, guns, traps, hatchets, knives, kettles, cloth of various kinds,
vermilion and other paints, beads, tobacco and liquor, for the fur
traders had not yet abandoned the disastrous custom of selling strong
drink to the Indians.

During the loading Hugh had an opportunity to say good-bye to Cadotte.
The latter’s kindness and interest in the boy’s welfare made him ashamed
of his doubts of the trader’s intentions.




                                  III
                         DRIVEN BEFORE THE GALE


On a clear, sunny morning of the first week in May, the Northwest
Company’s sloop _Otter_, with a favoring wind, made her way up-stream
towards the gateway of Lake Superior. At the Indian village on the curve
of the shore opposite Point aux Pins, men, women, children and
sharp-nosed dogs turned out to see the white-sailed ship go by. Through
the wide entrance to the St. Mary’s River, where the waters of Lake
Superior find their outlet, the sloop sailed under the most favorable
conditions. Between Point Iroquois on the south and high Gros Cap, the
Great Cape, on the north, its summit indigo against the bright blue of
the sky, she passed into the broad expanse of the great lake. The little
fur-trading vessels of the first years of the nineteenth century did not
follow the course taken by the big passenger steamers and long freighters
of today, northwest through the middle of the lake. Instead, the Captain
of the _Otter_ took her almost directly north.

The southerly breeze, light at first, freshened within a few hours, and
the sloop sailed before it like a gull on the wing. Past Goulais Point
and Coppermine Point and Cape Gargantua, clear to Michipicoton Bay, the
first stop, the wind continued favorable, the weather fine. It was
remarkably fine for early May, and Hugh Beaupré had hopes of a swift and
pleasant voyage. So far his work as a member of the crew of six was not
heavy. Quick-witted and eager to do his best, he learned his duties
rapidly, striving to obey on the instant the sharply spoken commands of
master and mate.

At the mouth of the Michipicoton River was a Northwest Company trading
post, and there the _Otter_ ran in to discharge part of her cargo of
supplies and goods. She remained at Michipicoton over night, and, after
the unloading, Hugh was permitted to go ashore. The station, a far more
important one, in actual trade in furs, than the post at the Sault, he
found an interesting place. Already some of the Indians were arriving
from the interior, coming overland with their bales of pelts on dog
sleds. When the Michipicoton River and the smaller streams should be free
of ice, more trappers would follow in their birch canoes.

As if on purpose to speed the ship, the wind had shifted to the southeast
by the following morning. The weather was not so pleasant, however, for
the sky was overcast. In the air was a bitter chill that penetrated the
thickest clothes. Captain Bennett, instead of appearing pleased with the
direction of the breeze, shook his head doubtfully as he gazed at the
gloomy sky and the choppy, gray water. A sailing vessel must take
advantage of the wind, so, in spite of the Captain’s apprehensive
glances, the _Otter_ went on her way.

All day the wind held favorable, shifting to a more easterly quarter and
gradually rising to a brisk blow. The sky remained cloudy, the distance
thick, the water green-gray.

As darkness settled down, rain began to fall, fine, cold and driven from
the east before a wind strong enough to be called a gale. In the wet and
chill, the darkness and rough sea, Hugh’s work was far harder and more
unpleasant. But he made no complaint, even to himself, striving to make
up by eager willingness for his ignorance of a sailor’s foul weather
duties. There was no good harbor near at hand, and, the gale being still
from the right quarter, Captain Bennett drove on before it. After
midnight the rain turned to sleet and snow. The wind began to veer and
shift from east to northeast, to north and back again.

Before morning all sense of location had been lost. Under close-reefed
sails, the sturdily built little _Otter_ battled wind, waves, sleet and
snow. She pitched and tossed and wallowed. All hands remained on deck.
Hugh, sick and dizzy with the motion, chilled and shivering in the bitter
cold, wished from the bottom of his heart he had never set foot upon the
sloop. Struggling to keep his footing on the heaving, ice-coated deck,
and to hold fast to slippery, frozen ropes, he was of little enough use,
though he did his best.

The dawn brought no relief. In the driving snow, neither shore nor sky
was to be seen, only a short stretch of heaving, lead-gray water.
Foam-capped waves broke over the deck. Floating ice cakes careened
against the sides of the ship. On the way to Michipicoton no ice had been
encountered, but now the tossing masses added to the peril.

Midday might as well have been midnight. The falling snow, fine, icy,
stinging, shut off all view more completely than blackest darkness. The
weary crew were fighting ceaselessly to keep the _Otter_ afloat. The
Captain himself clung with the steersman to the wheel. Then, quite
without warning, out of the northeast came a sudden violent squall. A
shriek of rending canvas, and the close-reefed sail, crackling with ice,
was torn away. Down crashed the shattered mast. As if bound for the
bottom of the lake, the sloop wallowed deep in the waves.

Hugh sprang forward with the others. On the slanting, ice-sheathed deck,
he slipped and went down. He was following the mast overboard, when
Baptiste seized him by the leg. The dangerous task of cutting loose the
wreckage was accomplished. The plucky _Otter_ righted herself and drove
on through the storm.

With the setting of the sun, invisible through the snow and mist, the
wind lessened. But that night, if less violent than the preceding one,
was no less miserable. Armored in ice and frozen snow, the sloop rode
heavy and low, battered by floating cakes, great waves washing her decks.
She had left the Sault on a spring day. Now she seemed to be back in
midwinter. Yet, skillfully handled by her master, she managed to live
through the night.

Before morning, the wind had fallen to a mere breeze. The waves no longer
swept the deck freely, but the lake was still so rough that the
ice-weighted ship made heavy going. Her battle with the storm had sprung
her seams. Two men were kept constantly at the pumps. No canvas was left
but the jib, now attached to the stump of the mast. With this makeshift
sail, and carried along by the waves, she somehow kept afloat.

From the lookout there came a hoarse bellow of warning. Through the
muffling veil of falling snow, his ears had caught the sound of surf. The
steersman swung the wheel over. The ship sheered off just as the foaming
crests of breaking waves and the dark mass of bare rocks appeared close
at hand.

Along the abrupt shore the _Otter_ beat her way, her captain striving to
keep in sight of land, yet far enough out to avoid sunken or detached
rocks. Anxiously his tired, bloodshot eyes sought for signs of a harbor.
It had been so long since he had seen sun or stars that he had little
notion of his position or of what that near-by land might be. Shadowy as
the shore appeared in the falling snow, its forbidding character was
plain enough, cliffs, forest crowned, rising abruptly from the water, and
broken now and then by shallow bays lined with tumbled boulders. Those
shallow depressions promised no shelter from wind and waves, even for so
small a ship as the _Otter_.

No less anxiously than Captain Bennett did Hugh Beaupré watch that
inhospitable shore. So worn was he from lack of sleep, exhausting and
long continued labor and seasickness, so chilled and numbed and weak and
miserable, that he could hardly stand. But the sight of solid land,
forbidding though it was, had revived his hope.

A shout from the starboard side of the sloop told him that land had
appeared in that direction also. In a few minutes the _Otter_, running
before the wind, was passing between forest-covered shores. As the shores
drew closer together, the water became calmer. On either hand and ahead
was land. The snow had almost ceased to fall now. The thick woods of
snow-laden evergreens and bare-limbed trees were plainly visible.

Staunch little craft though the _Otter_ was, her strained seams were
leaking freely, and her Captain had decided to beach her in the first
favorable spot. A bit of low point, a shallow curve in the shore with a
stretch of beach, served his purpose. There he ran his ship aground, and
made a landing with the small boat.

His ship safe for the time being, Captain Bennett’s next care was for his
crew. That they had come through the storm without the loss of a man was
a matter for thankfulness. Everyone, however, from the Captain himself to
Hugh, was worn out, soaked, chilled to the bone and more or less battered
and bruised. One man had suffered a broken arm when the mast went over
side, and the setting of the bone had been hasty and rough. The mate had
strained his back painfully.

All but the mate and the man with the broken arm, the Captain set to
gathering wood and to clearing a space for a camp on the sandy point. The
point was almost level and sparsely wooded with birch, mountain ash and
bushes. Every tree and shrub, its summer foliage still in the bud, was
wet, snow covered or ice coated. Birch bark and the dry, crumbly center
of a dead tree trunk made good tinder, however. Baptiste, skilled in the
art of starting a blaze under the most adverse conditions, soon had a
roaring fire. By that time the snow had entirely ceased, and the clouds
were breaking.

Around the big fire the men gathered to dry their clothes and warm their
bodies, while a thick porridge of hulled corn and salt pork boiled in an
iron kettle over a smaller blaze. The hot meal put new life into the
tired men. The broken arm was reset, the minor injuries cared for, and a
pole and bark shelter, with one side open to the fire, was set up. Before
the lean-to was completed the sun was shining. In spite of the sharp
north wind, the snow and ice were beginning to melt. A flock of
black-capped chickadees were flitting about the bare-branched birches,
sounding their brave, deep-throated calls, and a black and white
woodpecker was hammering busily at a dead limb.

No attempt was made to repair the ship that day. Only the most necessary
work was done, and the worn-out crew permitted to rest. A lonely place
seemed this unknown bay or river mouth, without white man’s cabin,
Indian’s bark lodge or even a wisp of smoke from any other fire. But the
sheltered harbor was a welcome haven to the sorely battered ship and the
exhausted sailors. Wolves howled not far from the camp that night, and
next morning their tracks were found in the snow on the beach close to
where the sloop lay. It would have required far fiercer enemies than the
slinking, cowardly, brush wolves to disturb the rest of the tired crew of
the _Otter_. Hugh did not even hear the beasts.




                                   IV
                            THE ISLE ROYALE


Shortly after dawn work on the _Otter_ was begun. The water was pumped
out, most of the cargo piled on the beach, and the sloop hauled farther
up by means of a rudely constructed windlass. Then the strained seams
were calked and a few new boards put in. A tall, straight spruce was
felled and trimmed to replace the broken mast, and a small mainsail
devised from extra canvas. The repairs took two long days of steady
labor. During that time the weather was bright, and, except in the deeply
shaded places, the snow and ice disappeared rapidly.

From the very slight current in the water, Captain Bennett concluded that
the place where he had taken refuge was a real bay, not a river mouth. He
had not yet discovered whether he was on the mainland or an island. The
repairs to his ship were of the first importance, and he postponed
determining his whereabouts until the _Otter_ was made seaworthy once
more. Not a trace of human beings had been found. The boldness of the
wolves and lynxes, that came close to the camp every night, indicated
that no one, red or white, was in the habit of visiting this lonely spot.

On the third day the sloop was launched, anchored a little way from shore
and rigged. While the reloading was going on, under the eyes of the mate,
the Captain, with Baptiste and Hugh at the oars, set out in the small
boat for the harbor mouth.

The shore along which they rowed was, at first, wooded to the water line.
As they went farther out and the bay widened, the land they were skirting
rose more steeply, edged with sheer rocks, cliffs and great boulders.
From time to time Captain Bennett glanced up at the abrupt rocks and
forested ridges on his right, or across to the lower land on the other
side of the bay. Directly ahead, some miles across the open lake, he
could see a distant, detached bit of land, an island undoubtedly. Most of
the time, however, his eyes were on the water. He was endeavoring to
locate the treacherous reefs and shallows he must avoid when he took his
ship out of her safe harbor.

An exclamation from Baptiste, who had turned his head to look to the west
and north, recalled the Captain from his study of the unfamiliar waters.
Beyond the tip of the opposite or northwestern shore of the bay, far
across the blue lake to the north, two dim, misty shapes had come into
view.

“Islands!” Captain Bennett exclaimed. “High, towering islands.”

Baptiste and Hugh pulled on with vigorous strokes. Presently the Captain
spoke again. “Islands or headlands. Go farther out.”

The two bent to their oars. As they passed beyond the end of the low
northwestern shore, more high land came into view across the water.

“What is it, Baptiste? Where are we?” asked Hugh, forgetting in his
eagerness that it was not his place to speak.

“It is Thunder Cape,” the Captain replied, overlooking the breach of
discipline, “the eastern boundary of Thunder Bay, where the Kaministikwia
empties and the New Fort is situated.”

“Truly it must be the Cap au Tonnerre, the Giant that Sleeps,” Baptiste
agreed, resting on his oars to study the long shape, like a gigantic
figure stretched out at rest upon the water. “The others to the north are
the Cape at the Nipigon and the Island of St. Ignace.”

“We are not as far off our course as I feared,” remarked the Captain with
satisfaction.

Hugh ventured another question. “What then, sir, is this land where we
are?”

Captain Bennett scanned the horizon as far as he could see. “Thunder Cape
lies a little to the north of west,” he said thoughtfully. “We are on an
island of course, a large one. There is only one island it can be, the
Isle Royale. I have seen one end or the other of Royale many times from a
distance, when crossing to the Kaministikwia or to the Grand Portage, but
I never set foot on the island before.” Again he glanced up at the steep
rocks and thick woods on his right, then his eyes sought the heaving blue
of the open lake. “This northwest breeze would be almost dead against us,
and it is increasing. We’ll not set sail till morning. By that time I
think we shall have a change of wind.”

Their purpose accomplished, the oarsmen turned the boat and started back
towards camp. Hugh, handling the bow oars, watched the shore close at
hand. They were skirting a rock cliff, sheer from the lake, its
brown-gray surface stained almost black at the water line, blotched
farther up with lichens, black, orange and green-gray, and worn and
seamed and rent with vertical cracks from top to bottom. The cracks ran
in diagonally, opening up the bay. As Hugh came into clear view of one of
the widest of the fissures, he noticed something projecting from it.

“See, Baptiste,” he cried, pointing to the thing, “someone has been here
before us.”

The French Canadian rested on his oars and spoke to Captain Bennett.
“There is the end of a boat in that hole, M’sieu, no birch canoe either.
How came it here in this wilderness?”

“Row nearer,” ordered the shipmaster, “and we’ll have a look at it.”

The two pulled close to the mouth of the fissure. At the Captain’s order,
Baptiste stepped over side to a boulder that rose just above the water.
From the boulder he sprang like a squirrel. His moccasined feet gripped
the rim of the old boat, and he balanced for an instant before jumping
down. Hugh, in his heavier boots, followed more clumsily. Captain Bennett
remained in the rowboat.

The wrecked craft in which the two found themselves was tightly wedged in
the crack. The bow was smashed and splintered and held fast by the ice
that had not yet melted in the dark, cold cleft. Indeed the boat was half
full of ice. It was a crude looking craft, and its sides, which had never
known paint, were weathered and water stained to almost the same color as
the blackened base of the rocks. The wreck was quite empty, not an oar or
a fragment of mast or canvas remaining.

The old boat had one marked peculiarity which could be seen even in the
dim light of the crack. The thwart that bore the hole where the mast had
stood was painted bright red, the paint being evidently a mixture of
vermilion and grease. It was but little faded by water and weather, and
on the red background had been drawn, in some black pigment, figures such
as the Indians used in their picture writing. Hugh had seen birch canoes
fancifully decorated about prow and stern, and he asked Baptiste if such
paintings were customary on the heavier wooden boats as well.

“On the outside sometimes they have figures in color, yes,” was the
reply, “but never have I seen one painted in this way.”

“I wonder what became of the men who were in her when she was driven on
these rocks.”

Baptiste shook his head. “It may be that no one was in her. What would he
do so far from the mainland? No, I do not think anyone was wrecked here.
This bateau was carried away in a storm from some beach or anchorage on
the north or west shore. There is nothing in her, though she was right
side up when she was driven in here by the waves. And here, in this
lonely place, there has been no one to plunder her.”

“Do no Indians live on this big island?” queried Hugh.

“I have never heard of anyone living here. It is far to come from the
mainland, and I have been told that the Indians have a fear of the place.
They think it is inhabited by spirits, especially one bay they call the
Bay of Manitos. It is said that in the old days the Ojibwa came here
sometimes for copper. They picked up bits of the metal on the beaches and
in the hills. Nowadays they have a tale that spirits guard the copper
stones.”

“If there is copper on the island perhaps this boat belonged to some
white prospector,” suggested Hugh.

Baptiste shrugged his shoulders. “Perhaps, but then the Indian manitos
must have destroyed him.”

“Well, at any rate the old manitos haven’t troubled us,” Hugh commented.

Again Baptiste shrugged. “We have not disturbed their copper, and—we are
not away from the place yet.”

The inspection of the wreck did not take many minutes. When Baptiste made
his report, the Captain agreed with him that the boat had probably
drifted away from some camp or trading post on the mainland, and had been
driven into the cleft in a storm. As nothing of interest had been found
in the wreck, he ordered Baptiste and Hugh to make speed back to camp.

By night the reloading was finished and everything made ready for an
early start. After sunset, the mate, adventuring up the bay, shot a
yearling moose. The crew of the _Otter_ feasted and, to celebrate the
completion of the work on the sloop, danced to Baptiste’s fiddle. From
the ridges beyond and above the camp, the brush wolves yelped in response
to the music.

Baptiste’s half superstitious, half humorous forebodings of what the
island spirits might do to the crew of the _Otter_ came to nothing, but
Captain Bennett’s prophecy of a change of wind proved correct. The next
day dawned fair with a light south breeze that made it possible for the
sloop to sail out of harbor. She passed safely through the narrower part
of the bay. Then, to avoid running close to the towering rocks which had
first appeared to her Captain through the falling snow, he steered across
towards the less formidable appearing northwest shore. That shore proved
to be a low, narrow, wooded, rock ridge running out into the lake. When
he reached the tip of the point, he found it necessary to go on some
distance to the northeast to round a long reef. The dangerous reef
passed, he set his course northwest towards the dim and distant Sleeping
Giant, the eastern headland of Thunder Bay.

To the relief of Hugh Beaupré, the last part of the voyage was made in
good time and without disaster. The boy looked with interest and some awe
at the towering, forest-clad form of Thunder Cape, a mountain top rising
from the water. On the other hand, as the _Otter_ entered the great bay,
were the scarcely less impressive heights of the Isle du Paté, called
to-day, in translation of the French name, Pie Island. Hugh asked
Baptiste how the island got its name and learned that it was due to some
fancied resemblance of the round, steep-sided western peak to a French
paté or pastry.

By the time the sloop was well into Thunder Bay, the wind, as if to speed
her on her way, had shifted to southeast. Clouds were gathering and rain
threatened as she crossed to the western shore, to the mouth of the
Kaministikwia. The river, flowing from the west, discharges through three
channels, forming a low, triangular delta. The north channel is the
principal mouth, and there the sloop entered, making her way about a mile
up-stream to the New Fort of the Northwest Company.

From the organization of the Northwest Fur Company down to a short time
before the opening of this story, the trading post at the Grand Portage,
south of the Pigeon River, and about forty miles by water to the
southwest of the Kaministikwia, had been the chief station and
headquarters of the company. The ground where the Grand Portage post
stood became a part of the United States when the treaty of peace after
the Revolution established the Pigeon River as the boundary line between
the United States and the British possessions. Though the Northwest
Company was a Canadian organization, it retained its headquarters south
of the Pigeon River through the last decade of the eighteenth century. In
the early years of the nineteenth, however, when the United States
government proposed to levy a tax on all English furs passing through
United States territory, the company headquarters was removed to Canadian
soil. Near the mouth of the Kaministikwia River on Thunder Bay was built
the New Fort, later to be known as Fort William after William
McGillivray, head of the company.




                                   V
                         THE HALF-BREED BROTHER


The Northwest Fur Company’s chief post was bustling with activity. The
New Fort itself, a stockaded enclosure, had been completed the year
before, but work on the log buildings within the walls was still going
on. Quarters for the agents, clerks and various employees, storehouses,
and other buildings were under construction or receiving finishing
touches. When the sloop _Otter_ came in sight, however, work ceased
suddenly. Log cabin builders threw down their axes, saws and hammers,
masons dropped their trowels, brick makers left the kilns that were
turning out bricks for chimneys and ovens, the clerks broke off their
bartering with Indians and half-breed trappers, and all ran down to the
riverside. There they mingled with the wild looking men, squaws and
children who swarmed from the camps of the voyageurs and Indians. When
the _Otter_ drew up against the north bank of the channel, the whole
population, permanent and temporary, was on hand to greet the first ship
of the season.

From the deck of the sloop, Hugh Beaupré looked on with eager eyes. It
was not so much of the picturesqueness and novelty of the scene, however,
as of his own private affairs that he was thinking. Anxiously he scanned
the crowd of white men, half-breeds and Indians, wondering which one of
the black-haired, deerskin-clad, half-grown lads, who slipped so nimbly
between their elders into the front ranks, was his half-brother. Many of
the crowd, old and young, white and red, came aboard, but none sought out
Hugh. He concluded that Blaise was either not there or was waiting for
him to go ashore.

Hugh soon had an opportunity to leave the ship. He had feared that he
might be more closely questioned by Captain Bennett or by some of the
crew about what he intended to do at the Kaministikwia, and was relieved
to reach shore without having to dodge the curiosity of his companions.
Only Baptiste asked him where he expected to meet his brother. Hugh
replied truthfully that he did not know.

Unobtrusively, calling as little attention to himself as possible, the
boy made his way through the crowd, but not towards the New Fort. No
doubt the Fort, with all its busy activity in its wilderness
surroundings, was worth seeing, but he did not choose to visit the place
for fear someone might ask his business there. He was keenly aware that
his business was likely to be, not with the Old Northwest Company, but
with its rival, the New Northwest Company, sometimes called in derision
the X Y Company. In a quandary where to look for his unknown brother, he
wandered about aimlessly for a time, avoiding rather than seeking
companionship.

The ground about the New Fort was low and swampy, with thick woods of
evergreens, birch and poplar wherever the land had not been cleared for
building or burned over through carelessness. Away from the river bank
and the Fort, the place was not cheerful or encouraging to a lonely boy
on that chill spring day. The sky was gray and lowering, the wind cold,
the distance shrouded in fog, the air heavy with the earthy smell of
damp, spongy soil and sodden, last year’s leaves. Hugh had looked forward
with eager anticipation to his arrival at the Kaministikwia, but now all
things seemed to combine to make him low spirited and lonely.

That the X Y Company had a trading post somewhere near the New Fort Hugh
knew, but he had no idea which way to go, and he did not wish to inquire.
At last he turned by chance into a narrow path that led through the woods
up-river. He was walking slowly, so wrapped in his own not very pleasant
thoughts as to be scarcely conscious of his surroundings, when a voice
sounded close at his shoulder. It was a low, soft voice, pronouncing his
own name, “Hugh Beaupré,” with an intonation that was not English.

Startled, Hugh whirled about, his hand on the sheathed knife that was his
only weapon. Facing him in the narrow trail stood a slender lad of less
than his own height, clad in a voyageur’s blanket coat over the deerskin
tunic and leggings of the woods and with a scarlet handkerchief bound
about his head instead of a cap. His dark features were unmistakably
Indian in form, but from under the straight, black brows shone hazel eyes
that struck Hugh with a sense of familiarity. They were the eyes of his
father, Jean Beaupré, the bright, unforgettable eyes that had been the
most notable feature of the elder Beaupré’s face.

“Hugh Beaupré?” the dark lad repeated with a questioning inflection. “My
brother?”

“You are my half-brother Blaise?” Hugh asked, somewhat stiffly, in
return.

“_Oui_,” the other replied, and added apologetically in excellent French,
“My English is bad, but you perhaps know French.”

“Let it be French then, though I doubt if I speak it as well as you.”

A swift smile crossed the hitherto grave face. “I was at school with the
Jesuit fathers in Quebec four winters,” Blaise answered.

Hugh was surprised. This new brother looked like an Indian, but he was no
mere wild savage. The schooling in Quebec accounted for the well written
letter. Before Hugh could find words in which to voice his thoughts,
Blaise spoke again.

“I was on the shore when the _Otter_ arrived. I thought when I saw you,
you must be my brother, though you have little the look of our father,
neither the hair nor the eyes.”

“I have been told that I resemble my mother’s people.” Hugh’s manner was
still cool and stiff.

Without comment upon the reply, Blaise went on in his low, musical voice
with its slightly singsong drawl. “I wished not to speak to you there
among the others. I waited until I saw you take this trail. Then, after a
little while, I followed.”

“Do you mean you have been following me around ever since I came ashore?”
Hugh exclaimed in English.

“Not following.” The swift smile so like, yet unlike, that of Jean
Beaupré, crossed the boy’s face again. “Not following, but,”—he dropped
into French-“I watched. It was not difficult, since you thought not that
anyone watched. We will go on now a little farther. Then we will talk
together, my brother.”

Passing Hugh, Blaise took the lead, going along the forest trail with a
lithe swiftness that spurred the older lad to his fastest walking pace.
After perhaps half a mile, they came to the top of a low knoll where an
opening had been made by the fall of a big spruce. Blaise seated himself
on the prostrate trunk, and Hugh dropped down beside him, more eager than
he cared to betray to hear his Indian brother’s story.

A strange tale the younger lad had to tell. Jean Beaupré had spent the
previous winter trading and trapping in the country south of the Lake of
the Woods, now included in the state of Minnesota. Blaise and his mother
had remained at Wauswaugoning Bay, north of the Grand Portage. Just at
dusk of a night late in March, Beaupré staggered into their camp, his
face ghastly, his clothes blood stained, mind and body in the last stages
of exhaustion. At the lodge entrance he fell fainting. It was some time
before his squaw and his son succeeded in bringing him back to
consciousness. In spite of his weakness he was determined to tell his
story. Mustering all his failing strength, he commenced.

Before the snow had begun to melt under the spring sun, he had started,
he told them, with one Indian companion and two dog sleds loaded with
pelts, for Lake Superior. Travelling along the frozen streams and lakes,
he reached the trading post at the Fond du Lac on the St. Louis River.
While he was there, a spell of unusually warm early spring weather
cleared the river mouth. The winter had been mild, with little ice in
that part of the lake. At Fond du Lac Beaupré obtained a bateau, as the
Canadians called their wooden boats, and rigged it with mast and sail. He
and his companion put their furs aboard, and started up the northwest
shore of Lake Superior.

Thus far he succeeded in telling his story clearly enough, then, worn out
with the effort, he lapsed into unconsciousness. Twice he rallied and
tried to go on, but his speech was vague and disconnected. As well as he
could, Blaise pieced together the fragments of the story. Somewhere
between the Fond du Lac and the Grand Portage the bateau had been wrecked
in a storm. When he reached this part of his tale, Jean Beaupré became
much agitated. He gasped out again and again that he had hidden the furs
and the “packet” in a safe cache, and that Blaise and his other son Hugh
must go get them. He called the furs his sons’ inheritance, for he was
clearly aware that he could not live. The pelts were a very good season’s
catch, and the boys must take them to the New Northwest Company’s post at
the Kaministikwia. But it was the packet about which he seemed most
anxious. Hugh must carry the packet to Montreal to Monsieur Dubois.
Blaise asked where his brother was to be found, and received instructions
to go or send to the Sault. Before the lad learned definitely where to
look for the furs and the packet, Jean Beaupré lapsed once more into
unconsciousness. He rallied only long enough for the ministrations of a
priest, who happened to be at the Grand Portage on a missionary journey.

Though Hugh had scarcely known his father, he was much moved at the story
of his death. He felt a curious mixture of sympathy for and jealousy of
his Indian half-brother, when he saw, in spite of the latter’s controlled
and quiet manner, how strongly he felt his loss. Hugh respected the depth
of the boy’s sorrow, yet he could not but feel as if he, the elder son,
had been unrightfully defrauded. The half-breed lad had known their
common father so much better than he, the wholly white son. For some
minutes after Blaise ceased speaking, Hugh sat silent, oppressed by
conflicting thoughts and feelings. Then his mind turned to the present,
practical aspect of the situation.

“It will not be an easy search,” he remarked. “Have you no clue to the
spot where the furs are hidden?”

“None, except that it is a short way only from the place where the
wrecked boat lies.”

“Where the boat lay when father left it,” commented Hugh thoughtfully.
“It may have drifted far from there by now.”

“That is possible. I could not learn from him where the wreck happened,
though I asked several times. The boat was driven on the rocks. That is
all I know.”

“And his companion? Was he drowned?”

Blaise shook his head. “I know not. Our father said nothing of Black
Thunder, but I think he must be dead, or our father would not have come
alone.”

“How shall we set about the search?”

“We will go down along the shore,” Blaise replied, taking the lead as if
by right, although he was the younger by two or three years. “We will
look first for the wrecked bateau. When we have found that, we will make
search for the cache of furs.”

Hugh’s thoughts turned to another part of his half-brother’s tale. “Tell
me, Blaise,” he said suddenly, “what was it caused my father’s death,
starvation, exhaustion, hardship? Or was he hurt when the boat was
wrecked? You spoke of his blood-stained clothes.”

“It was not starvation and not cold,” the half-breed boy replied gravely.
“He was hurt, sore hurt.” The lad cast a swift glance about him, at the
still and silent woods shadowy with approaching night. Then he leaned
towards Hugh and spoke so low the latter could scarcely catch the words.
“Our father was sore hurt, but not in the wreck. How he ever lived to
reach us I know not. The wound was in his side.”

“But how came he by a wound?” Hugh whispered, unconsciously imitating the
other’s cautious manner.

Blaise shook his black head solemnly. “I know not how, but not in the
storm or the wreck. The wound was a knife wound.”

“What?” cried Hugh, forgetting caution in his surprise. “Had he enemies
who attacked him? Did someone murder him?”

Again Blaise shook his head. “It might have been in fair fight. Our
father was ever quick with word and deed. The bull moose himself is not
braver. Yet I think the blow was not a fair one. I think it was struck
from behind. The knife entered here.” Blaise placed his hand on a spot a
little to the left of the back-bone.

“A blow from behind it must have been. Could it have been his companion
who struck him?”

“Black Thunder? No, for then Black Thunder would have carried away the
furs. Our father would not have told us to go get them.”

“True,” Hugh replied, but after a moment of thought he added, “Yet the
fellow may have attacked him, and father, though mortally wounded, may
have slain him.”

A quick, fierce gleam shone in the younger boy’s bright eyes. “If he who
struck was not killed by our father’s hand,” he said in a low, tense
voice, “you and I are left to avenge our father.” It was plain that
Christian schooling in Quebec had not rooted out from Little Caribou’s
nature the savage’s craving for revenge. To tell the truth, at the
thought of that cowardly blow, Hugh’s own feelings were nearly as fierce
as those of his half-Indian brother.




                                   VI
                        DOWN THE NORTHWEST SHORE


Hugh slept on board the _Otter_ that night and helped with the unloading
next day. His duties over, he was free to go where he would. To
Baptiste’s queries, he replied that he had seen his half-brother and had
arranged to accompany him to the Grand Portage. Later he would come again
to the Kaministikwia or return to the Sault by the southerly route.
Having satisfied the simple fellow’s curiosity, Hugh went with him to
visit the New Fort.

Baptiste had a great admiration for the Fort. Proudly he called Hugh’s
attention to the strong wooden walls, flanked with bastions. He obtained
permission to take his friend through the principal building and display
to him the big dining hall. There, later in the year, at the time of the
annual meeting, partners, agents and clerks would banquet together and
discuss matters of the highest import to the fur trade. He also showed
Hugh the living quarters of the permanent employees of the post, the
powder house, the jail, the kilns and forges. When the Fort should be
completed, with all its storehouses and workshops, it would be almost a
village within walls. Outside the stockade was a shipyard and a tract of
land cleared for a garden. Hugh, who had lived in the city of Montreal,
was less impressed with the log structures, many of them still
unfinished, than was the voyageur who had spent most of his days in the
wilds. Nevertheless the lad wondered at the size and ambitiousness of
this undertaking and accomplishment in the wilderness. Far removed from
the civilization of eastern Canada, the trading post was forced to be a
little city in itself, dependent upon the real cities for nothing it
could possibly make or obtain from the surrounding country.

To tell the truth, however, Hugh found more of real interest and novelty
without the walls than within. There, Baptiste took him through the camps
of Indians, voyageurs and woodsmen or coureurs de bois, where bark lodges
and tents and upturned canoes served as dwellings. In one of the wigwams
Blaise was living, awaiting the time when he and his elder brother should
start on their adventurous journey.

Already Blaise had provided himself with a good birch canoe, ribbed with
cedar, and a few supplies, hulled corn, strips of smoked venison as hard
and dry as wood, a lump of bear fat and a birch basket of maple sugar. He
also had a blanket, a gun and ammunition, an iron kettle and a small axe.
Hugh had been able to bring nothing with him but a blanket, his hunting
knife and an extra shirt, but, as he had worked his passage, he still
possessed a small sum of money. Now that he was no longer a member of the
crew of the _Otter_, he had no place to sleep and wondered what he should
do. Blaise solved the problem by taking him about a mile up-river to the
post of the New Northwest or X Y Company, a much smaller and less
pretentious place than the New Fort, and introducing him to the clerk in
charge. Blaise had already explained that he and Hugh were going to get
the elder Beaupré’s furs and would bring them back to the New Company’s
post. So the clerk treated Hugh in a most friendly manner, invited him to
share his own house, and even offered to give him credit for the gun,
canoe paddle and other things he needed. Hugh, not knowing whether the
search for the furs would be successful, preferred to pay cash.

From the X Y clerk the lad learned that his father, always proud and
fiery of temper, had, the summer before, taken offence at one of the Old
Company’s clerks. The outcome of the quarrel had been that Beaupré had
entered into a secret agreement with the New Company, promising to bring
his pelts to them. The clerk warned both boys not to let any of the Old
Company’s men get wind of their undertaking. The rivalry between the two
organizations was fierce and ruthless. Both went on the principle that
“all is fair in love or war,” and the relations between them were very
nearly those of war. If the Old Company learned of the hidden furs, they
would either send men to seek the cache or would try to force the boys to
bring the pelts to the New Fort. The X Y clerk even hinted that Jean
Beaupré had probably been the victim of some of the Old Company’s men who
had discovered that he was carrying his furs to the rival post. Hugh,
during his winter at the Sault, had heard many tales of the wild deeds of
the fur traders and had listened to the most bitter talk against the X Y
or New Northwest company. Accordingly he was inclined to believe there
might be some foundation for the agent’s suspicions. Blaise, however,
took no heed of the man’s hints. When Hugh mentioned his belief that his
father had been murdered because of his change of allegiance, the younger
boy shrugged his shoulders, a habit caught from his French parent.

“That may be,” he replied, “but it is not in that direction _I_ shall
look for the murderer.” And that was the only comment he would make.

To avoid curiosity and to keep their departure secret if possible, the
boys decided not to go down the north branch of the Kaministikwia past
the New Fort, but upstream to the dividing point, then descend the lower
or southern channel. Early the third morning after Hugh’s arrival, they
set out from the New Northwest post. Up the river against the current
they paddled between wooded shores veiled by the white, frosty mist.
Without meeting another craft or seeing a lodge or tent or even the smoke
of a fire, they passed the spot where the middle channel branched off,
went on to the southern one, down that, aided by the current now, and out
upon the fog-shrouded waters of the great bay. Hugh could not have found
his way among islands and around points and reefs, but his half-brother
had come this route less than two weeks before. With the retentive memory
and excellent sense of direction of the Indian, he steered unhesitatingly
around and among the dim shapes. When the sun, breaking through the fog,
showed him the shore line clearly, he gave a little grunt of
satisfaction. He had kept his course and was just where he had believed
himself to be.

This feat of finding his way in the fog gave the elder brother some
respect for the younger. Before the day was over, that respect had
considerably increased. As the older boy was also the heavier, he had
taken his place in the stern, kneeling on his folded blanket. Wielding a
paddle was not a new exercise to Hugh. He thought that Blaise set too
easy a pace, and, anxious to prove that he was no green hand, he
quickened his own stroke. Blaise took the hint and timed his paddling to
his brother’s. Hugh was sturdy, well knit and proud of his muscular
strength. For a couple of hours he kept up the pace he had set. Then his
stroke grew slower and he put less force into it. After a time Blaise
suggested a few minutes’ rest. With the stern blade idle and the bow one
dipped only now and then to keep the course, they floated for ten or
fifteen minutes.

Refreshed by this brief respite and ashamed of tiring so soon, Hugh
resumed work with a more vigorous stroke, but it was Blaise who set the
pace now. In a clear, boyish voice, which gave evidence in only an
occasional note of beginning to break and roughen, he started an old
French song, learned from his father, and kept time with his paddle.

    “Je n’ai pas trouvé personne
  Que le rossignol chantant la belle rose,
    La belle rose du rosier blanc!”

Roughly translated:

    “Never yet have I found anyone
  But the nightingale, to sing of the lovely rose,
    The lovely rose of the white rose tree!”

At first Hugh, though his voice broke and quavered, attempted to join in,
but singing took breath and strength. He soon fell silent, content to dip
and raise his blade in time to the younger lad’s tune. An easy enough
pace it seemed, but the half-breed boy kept it up hour after hour, with
only brief periods of rest.

Hugh began to feel the strain sorely. His arms and back ached, his breath
came wearily, and the lower part of his body was cramped and numb from
his kneeling position. He had eaten breakfast at dawn and, as the sun
climbed the sky and started down again, he began to wonder when and where
his Indian brother intended to stop for the noon meal. Did Blaise purpose
to travel all day without food, Hugh wondered. He opened his lips to ask,
then, through pride, closed them again. Blaise, just fourteen, was nearly
three years younger than Hugh. What Blaise could endure, the elder lad
felt he must endure also. He did not intend to admit hunger or weariness,
so long as his companion appeared untouched by either. With empty stomach
and aching muscles, the white boy plied his paddle steadily and doggedly
in time to the voyageur songs and the droning, monotonous Indian chants,
the constantly repeated syllables of which had no meaning for him.

It was the weather that came to Hugh’s rescue at last. After the lifting
of the chill, frosty, morning fog, the day was bright. The waters of
Thunder Bay were smooth at first, then rippled by a light north breeze.
As the day wore on, the breeze came up to a brisk blow. Partly protected
by the islands and points of the irregular shore, the two lads kept on
their way. The wind increased. It roughened every stretch of open water
to waves that broke foaming on the beaches or dashed in spray against the
gray-brown rocks. Paddling became more and more difficult. Blaise ceased
his songs. As they rounded a low point edged with gravel and sand, and
saw before them a stretch of green-blue water swept by the full force of
the wind into white-tipped waves, the half-breed boy told Hugh to steer
for the beach. A few moments later he gave his elder brother a quick
order to cease paddling.

Realizing that Blaise wished to take the canoe in alone, Hugh, breathing
a sigh of relief, laid down his paddle. The muscles of his back and
shoulders were strained, it seemed to him, almost to the breaking point,
and he felt that, in spite of his pride, he must soon have asked for
rest. Without disturbing the balance of the wobbly craft, he tried to rub
his cramped leg muscles. He feared that in trying to rise and step out,
he might overturn the boat, to the mirth and disgust of his Indian
brother.

With a few strong and skillful strokes, Blaise shot the canoe into the
shallow water off the point. When the bow struck the sand, with a sharp
command to Hugh, he rose and stepped out. As quickly as he could, Hugh
got to his feet, and managed to step over the opposite side without
stumbling or upsetting the canoe. Raising the light bark craft, the two
carried it up the shelving shore, to the bushes that edged the woods,
well beyond the reach of the waves.

The canoe carefully deposited in a safe spot, Hugh turned to Blaise.
“Shall we be delayed long, do you think?” he asked.

Blaise gave his French shrug. “It may be that the wind will go down with
the sun.”

“Then, if we are to stay here so long, a little food wouldn’t come
amiss.”

The younger boy nodded and began to unlash the packages which, to
distribute the weight evenly, were securely tied to two poles lying along
the bottom of the canoe. Hugh sought dry wood, kindled it with sparks
from his flint and steel, and soon had a small fire on the pebbles. From
a tripod of sticks the iron kettle was swung over the blaze, and when the
water boiled, Blaise put in corn, a little of the dried venison, which he
had pounded to a powder on a flat stone, and a portion of fat. He had
made no mention of hunger, but when the stew was ready, Hugh noticed that
he ate heartily. Meanwhile the elder boy, tired and sore muscled, watched
for some sign of weariness in his companion. If Blaise was weary he had
too much Indian pride to admit the fact to his new-found white brother.

The open lake was now rich blue, flecked with foamy whitecaps, the air so
clear that the deep color of the water formed a sharp cut line against
the paler tint of the sky at the horizon. The May wind was bitterly cold,
so the lads rigged a shelter with the poles of the canoe and a blanket.
The ground was so hard the poles could not be driven in. Three or four
inches down, it was either frozen or composed of solid rock. The boys
were obliged to brace each pole with stones and boulders. The blanket,
stretched between the supports, kept off the worst of the wind, and
between the screen and the fire, the two rested in comfort. Hugh soon
fell asleep, and when he woke he was pleased to find that Blaise had
dropped off also. Perhaps the latter was wearier than he had chosen to
admit.

The wind did not go down with the sun, and the adventurers made camp for
the night. Both blankets would be needed for bedding, so the screen was
taken down and the canoe propped up on one side. Then a supply of wood
was gathered and balsam branches cut for a bed. After a supper of corn
porridge and maple sugar, the two turned in. Blaise went to sleep as soon
as he was rolled in his blanket, but Hugh was wakeful. He lay there on
his fragrant balsam bed in the shelter of the canoe, watching the
flickering light of the camp fire and the stars coming out in the dark
sky. Listening to the rushing of the wind in the trees and the waves
breaking on the pebbles and thundering on a bit of rock shore near at
hand, surrounded on every side by the strange wilderness of woods and
waters, the boy could not sleep for a time. He kept thinking of his
roving, half-wild father, and of the strange legacy he had left his sons.
Twice Hugh rose to replenish the fire, when it began to die down, before
he grew drowsy and drifted away into the land of dreams.




                                  VII
                            AT WAUSWAUGONING


Hugh woke chilled and stiff, to find Blaise rekindling the fire. The
morning was clear and the sun coming up across the water. Winds and waves
had subsided enough to permit going on with the journey.

Cutting wood limbered Hugh’s sore muscles somewhat, and a hot breakfast
cheered him, but the first few minutes of paddling were difficult and
painful. With set teeth he persisted, and gradually the worst of the
lameness wore off.

Skirting the shore of Lake Superior in a bark canoe requires no small
amount of patience. Delays from unfavorable weather must be frequent and
unavoidable. On the whole, Hugh and Blaise were lucky during the first
part of their trip, and they reached the Pigeon River in good time.
Rounding the long point to the south of the river mouth, they paddled to
the north end of Wauswaugoning Bay.

Hugh was gaining experience and his paddling muscles were hardening. He
would soon be able, he felt, to hold his own easily at any pace his
half-brother set. So far Blaise had proved a good travelling companion,
somewhat silent and grave to be sure, but dependable, patient and for the
most part even tempered. His lack of talkativeness Hugh laid to his
Indian blood, his gravity to his sorrow at the loss of the father he had
known so much better than Hugh had known him. Blaise, the older boy
decided, was, in spite of his Quebec training and many civilized ways,
more Indian than French. Only now and then, in certain gestures and quick
little ways, in an unexpected gleam of humor or sudden flash of anger,
did the lad show his kinship with Jean Beaupré.

Satisfactory comrade though the half-breed boy seemed, Hugh was in no
haste to admit Blaise to his friendship. Since first receiving his
letter, Hugh had felt doubtful of this Indian brother, inclined to resent
his very existence. Their relations from their first meeting had been
entirely peaceful but somewhat cool and stiff. As yet, Hugh was obliged
to admit to himself, he had no cause for complaint of his half-brother’s
behavior, but he felt that the real test of their companionship was to
come.

The search for the cache of pelts had not yet begun, but was to begin
soon. It was into his wife’s lodge at Wauswaugoning Bay that Jean Beaupré
had stumbled dying. Somewhere between Grand Portage Bay, which lies just
to the west and south of Wauswaugoning, and the Fond du Lac at the mouth
of the St. Louis River, the bateau must have been wrecked and the furs
hidden.

The two boys landed on a bit of beach at the north end of the bay, hid
the canoe among the alders, and set out on foot. Blaise fully expected to
find his mother awaiting him, but the cleared spot among the trees was
deserted. Of the camp nothing remained but the standing poles of a lodge,
from which the bark covering had been stripped, and refuse and cast-off
articles strewn upon the stony ground in the untidy manner in which the
Indians and most of the white voyageurs left their camping places. With a
little grunt, which might have meant either disappointment or disgust,
Blaise looked about him. He noticed two willow wands lying crossed on the
ground and pegged down with a crotched stick.

“She has gone that way,” said the boy, indicating the longest section of
willow, pointing towards the northeast.

“If she travelled by canoe, it is strange we did not meet her,” Hugh
remarked.

Blaise shrugged. “Who knows how long ago she went? The ashes are wet with
rain. I cannot tell whether the fire burned two days ago or has been out
many days. There is another message here.” He squatted down to study the
shorter stick. At one end the bark had been peeled off and a cross mark
cut into the wood. The marked end pointed towards a thick clump of
spruces.

The boy rose and walked towards the group of trees, Hugh following
curiously. Blaise pushed his way between the spruces, and, before Hugh
could join him, came out again carrying a mooseskin bag. In the open
space by the ashes of the fire, he untied the thong and dumped the
contents. There was a smaller skin bag, partly full, a birch bark package
and a bundle of clothing. Tossing aside the bundle, Blaise opened the
small bag, thrust in his hand, then, with the one word “manomin,” passed
the bag to Hugh. It was about half full of wild rice grains, very hard
and dry. The bark package Blaise did not open. He merely sniffed at it
and laid it down. Hugh, picking it up and smelling of it, recognized the
unmistakable odor of smoked fish. The bundle, which the younger boy
untied next, contained two deerskin shirts or tunics, two pairs of
leggings of the same material and half a dozen pairs of moccasins. All
were new and well made, the moccasins decorated with dyed porcupine
quills, the breasts of the tunics with colored bead embroidery.

The lad’s face lighted with a look of pleasure, and he glanced at Hugh
proudly. “They are my mother’s work,” he said, “made of the best skins,
well made. Now we have strong new clothes for our journey.”

“We?” replied Hugh questioningly.

“Truly. There are two suits and six pairs of moccasins. Look.” He held up
one of the shirts. “This she made larger than the other. She knows you
are the elder and must be the larger.” He handed the shirt to Hugh,
following it with a pair of the leggings. Looking over the moccasins, he
selected the larger ones and gave them also to his white brother. “They
are better to wear in a canoe than boots,” he said.

For a moment Hugh was silent with embarrassment. He was touched by the
generosity of the Indian woman, who had put as much time and care on
these clothes for her unknown stepson as upon those for her own boy. He
flushed, however, at the thought of accepting anything from the squaw who
had taken his mother’s place in his father’s life. Yet to decline the
gift would be to offer a deadly insult not only to the Indian woman but
to her son as well.

“I am obliged to your mother,” Hugh stammered. “It was—kind of her.”

Blaise made no other reply than a nod. He appeared pleased with the
appearance and quality of the clothes, but took it as a matter of course
that his mother should make them for Hugh as well as for himself.

“I wish she had left more food,” he said after a moment, “but at this
time of the year food is scarce. That manomin is all that remained of the
harvest of the autumn. We have eaten much of our food. We must fish when
we can.”

“Can’t we buy corn and pork from the traders at the Grand Portage?” Hugh
inquired.

Blaise shook his head doubtfully. “We will try,” he said.

He put the food back in the mooseskin bag and hung it on a tree. Then he
turned to Hugh and said softly and questioningly, “You wish to see where
we laid him?”

Hugh nodded, a lump rising in his throat, and followed his brother.
Beyond the clump of spruces, in a tiny clearing, was Jean Beaupré’s
grave. Hugh was surprised and horrified to see that it was, in
appearance, an Indian grave. Poles had been stuck in the ground on either
side, bent over and covered with birch bark. The boy’s face flushed with
indignation.

“Why,” he demanded, “did you do that?” He pointed to the miniature lodge.

Blaise looked puzzled. “It is the Ojibwa custom.”

“Father was not an Ojibwa. He was a white man and should have been buried
like a white man and a Christian,” Hugh burst out.

Blaise drew himself up with a dignity strange in so young a lad. “He
_was_ buried like a Christian,” he replied quietly. “Look.” He pointed to
the rude cross set up in front of the opening to the shelter, instead of
the pole, with offerings and trophies hung upon it, usually placed beside
Ojibwa graves. “The good father absolved him and read the burial service
over him,” the lad went on, “and I placed the cross there. Then the
friends of my mother covered the spot according to the Ojibwa custom. Our
father was an Ojibwa by adoption and it was right they should do that.
Now no Ojibwa will ever disturb that spot.”

Hugh’s anger had been cooling. After all, his father had thrown in his
lot with the Indians and they had meant to honor him. At least he had
received Christian burial, and it was something to know that his grave
would not be disturbed. In silence Hugh turned away. He could not quite
bring himself to apologize for his hasty words.

The relations between the half-brothers were more than ordinarily cool
the rest of that day. Blaise, travelling overland by a trail he knew,
went to the Grand Portage Bay in quest of supplies. Even before the
formation of the Northwest Company, the bay had been a favorite stopping
place, first for the French, and then for the English traders who
followed the Pigeon River route to the country west of the lake. An old
Indian trail led from the bay to a spot on the river above the falls and
rapids that make its lower course unnavigable. Gitchi Onegam
Kaministigoya the Indians had called the trail and the bay, “the great
carrying place of the river that is hard to navigate.” Early in the
history of the fur trade, the white traders began to use that trail,
portaging their goods some nine miles from the bay to the river and
bringing the bales of furs back over the same route.

Since the Old Northwest Company had removed its headquarters to Thunder
Bay and had practically abandoned the Pigeon River route for the
Kaministikwia, Grand Portage was not so busy a place, but the Old Company
still maintained a post at the partly deserted fort on the north shore of
the bay. On the west side the chief post and headquarters of the New
Company also remained open for business. Blaise visited both posts, only
to find that, as the winter’s supplies were almost exhausted and no one
knew when fresh stores would arrive, nothing could be spared.

Anxious to avoid questions, Hugh had not accompanied Blaise. He occupied
himself with fishing from the canoe, and caught one lake trout of about
three pounds weight. Making a grill of willow twigs resting on stones
over the coals, he had the trout ready to broil when Blaise returned. The
common way of cooking fish among both the Indians and white men of the
woods was to boil them, but Hugh, recently from the civilized world,
preferred his broiled, baked or fried.

Blaise, after one mouthful, deigned to approve his elder brother’s
cooking. “It is good,” he said. “I have not eaten fish so cooked since I
ate it on Fridays in school at Quebec.”

Neither lad had anything more to say during the meal or for some time
afterwards. Finally Blaise put his hand in the leather pouch he wore at
his belt, drew out something and handed it to Hugh. The latter unwrapped
the bit of soft doeskin and found his father’s gold seal ring. He glanced
quickly up at Blaise.

“It is yours,” the younger brother said. “I gave it not to you before,
because I liked not to part with it.”

Moved by a generous impulse, Hugh stretched out his hand to return the
ring, but Blaise would not take it.

“No,” he said firmly. “You are the elder son. It is yours.”

The adventurers intended to continue their trip next day, but fate was
against them. Before dawn rain was beating on the canoe that sheltered
them, and the thundering of the waves on the rocks in the more exposed
part of the bay sounded in Hugh’s ears as he woke. That storm was the
beginning of a period of bad weather, rain, fog, and wind that cleared
the air, but rose to a gale, lashing the waters of the bay to
white-capped waves that did not diminish until hours after the wind had
blown itself out. Eight days the two camped in a hastily built wigwam on
Wauswaugoning Bay, fishing when they could, and snaring one lean hare and
a few squirrels. They hunted for larger game and found some deer tracks,
but did not catch sight of the animals. As for birds, they saw none but
gulls, a loon or two and an owl, and did not care to try anything so
tough and strong for food. So they were obliged to consume a good part of
their corn.




                                  VIII
                        THE BLOOD-STAINED TUNIC


But a few days of May remained when Hugh and Blaise left Wauswaugoning.
Their progress was necessarily slow, not only on account of delays due to
wind and weather, but because they were obliged to skirt the shore
closely, entering each bay and cove, rounding every point, and keeping
keen watch for any sign of the wrecked boat. They had no clue to the spot
where it lay. It might have been thrown up on the open shore, or driven
into some rock-infested bay or stream mouth. At each stream they made a
close examination, ascending a short distance, by canoe where that was
possible, or up over the rocky banks on foot. They had searched the
mouths of more than a dozen streams and creeks when they came to one,
where Blaise, in entering, cautioned Hugh to steer far to one side.
Almost across the river mouth extended a long bar of sand and gravel,
covered by an inch or two of water, for the river was still high from the
spring flood. Bars or rock reefs were, Hugh was learning, common
characteristics of the streams emptying into Superior. To enter them
without accident required care and caution.

The bar was passed, but further progress up-stream proved impossible. The
current was strong, and just ahead were foaming rapids where the water
descended among rocks and over boulders. Steering into a bit of quiet
backwater behind the bar, the boys found a landing place and carried the
canoe ashore. Then they scrambled up the bank a short distance, searching
the stream mouth for signs of the wreck. Caught in a blossoming
serviceberry bush growing on a rock at the very edge of the river, Blaise
found an old moccasin. He examined the ragged, dirty, skin shoe in
silence for a moment. Then, hazel eyes gleaming, he held the thing out to
Hugh.

“It is my mother’s work,” he said in tense tones. Hugh snatched the worn
moccasin. “Do you mean this was my father’s?”

Blaise nodded. “It is my mother’s work,” he repeated. “I would know it
anywhere, the pattern of quills, the shaping, even the skin. It is from
the elk hide our father brought from the region of the great river.” He
made a gesture towards the southwest, and Hugh knew he referred to the
Mississippi. “See, it is just like ours,” Blaise concluded, holding up
one foot.

Hugh glanced from the almost new moccasin to the ragged one, and drew a
long breath. “Then it may be about here somewhere father was wrecked.”

“We must make search,” was the brief reply.

Thoroughly they searched, first the banks of the stream, then the lake
beach, parallel ridges of flat flakes of rock pushed up by the waves.
They even examined the ground beyond the beach, a rough slope composed of
the same sort of dark rock flakes, partly decomposed into crumbly soil.
The two pushed through the bushes and small trees that sparsely clothed
the stony ground, but nowhere did they find any sign of wrecked boat or
hidden cache. Yet they did find something, something that hinted of
violence and crime.

Well up from the shore and not far from the stream bank, Hugh came upon
an open space, where a ring of blackened stones and ashes showed that a
cooking fire had burned. He took one look, turned and plunged into the
bushes to find Blaise. But he stopped suddenly. His foot had come in
contact with something that was not a rock, a stump or a stick. Stooping,
he pulled from under a scraggly wild raspberry, where it had been dropped
or thrust, a bundle. Unrolling it, he found it to be a ragged deerskin
tunic, damp, dirty and bearing dark stains. The boy stood transfixed
staring at the thing in his hands. After a moment he raised his head and
shouted for Blaise.

Blaise answered from near by, but to Hugh it seemed a long time before
the younger boy came through the bushes. In silence the elder handed the
other the stained shirt. Blaise took it, examined it quickly and uttered
an Indian grunt.

“Blood?” asked Hugh pointing to the stains.

Blaise grunted assent.

“Father’s blood?” Hugh’s voice broke.

Blaise looked up quickly. “No, no. Black Thunder’s.”

“How do you know?”

“By this.” The lad pointed to a crude figure, partly painted, partly
embroidered in black wool, on the breast of the tunic. “This is Black
Thunder’s mark, the thunder bird. Without doubt this shirt was his.”

“But how did it come here? There’s no sign of the wrecked boat.”

Blaise shook his head in puzzlement. “I do not understand,” he said
slowly.

The half-breed lad was keen witted in many ways, but the white boy’s mind
worked more quickly on such a problem. “It may be,” Hugh speculated,
“that they were wrecked farther along the shore. Coming on by land, they
camped here and some accident happened to Black Thunder, or perhaps he
had been bleeding from a hurt received in the wreck, and he changed his
shirt and threw away the bloody one.”

“Where was it?” asked Blaise.

“Under this raspberry bush, rolled up.”

“And why think you they camped here?”

“I’ll show you.”

Hugh led the way to the little clearing. Carefully and absorbedly Blaise
examined the spot.

“Someone has camped here,” he concluded, “but only a short time, not more
than one night. He made no lodge, for there are no poles. He cut no
boughs for beds, and he left scarce any litter. It may be he cooked but
one meal and went on. If he lay here for the night, the marks of his body
no longer remain. If anyone was slain here,” he added after a moment,
“the rains washed out the stains. It was a long time ago that he was
here, I think.”

“If Black Thunder was killed here,” Hugh questioned, “what was done with
his body?”

Blaise shrugged. “There is the lake, and a body weighted with stones
stays down.”

“Then why was his blood-stained shirt not sunk with him?”

“That I know not,” and the puzzled look returned to the lad’s face.

“Might it not be that father was wearing Black Thunder’s shirt and that
the stains are from his wound?”

“He wore his own when he came to the lodge, and the stains are in the
wrong place. They are on the breast. No, he never wore this shirt. The
blood must be Black Thunder’s.”

The sun was going down when the two boys finally gave up the search for
the wrecked boat or some further trace of Jean Beaupré and his companion.
Neither lad had any wish to camp in the vicinity. Blaise especially
showed strong aversion to the spot.

“There are evil stories of this river,” he explained to his brother. “If
our father camped here, it was because he was very weary indeed. He was a
brave man though, far braver than most men, white or red.”

“Why should he have hesitated to camp here?” Hugh inquired curiously.
“It’s true we have seen pleasanter spots along this shore, yet this is
not such a bad one.”

“There are evil stories of the place,” Blaise repeated in a low voice.
“The lake from which this river flows is the abode of a devil.” The boy
made the sign of the cross on his breast and went on in his musical
singsong. “On the shores of that lake have been found the devil’s tracks,
great footprints, like those of a man, but many times larger and very far
apart. So the lake is called the ‘Lake of Devil Tracks’ and the river
bears the same name. It is said that when that devil wishes to come down
to the shore of the great lake to fish for trout, it is this way he
comes, striding along the bed of the river, even at spring flood.”

Hugh Beaupré, half Scotch, half French, and living in a time when the
superstitious beliefs of an earlier day persisted far more actively than
they do now, was not without his share of such superstitions. But this
story of a devil living on a lake and walking along a river, struck him
as absurd and he said so with perfect frankness.

“Surely you don’t believe such a tale, Blaise, and neither did my
father.”

“I know not if the tale is true,” the younger boy answered somewhat
sullenly. “Men say they have seen the footprints and everyone knows there
are devils, both red and white. Why should not one live on that lake
then? How know we it was not that devil who killed Black Thunder and left
the bloody tunic under the raspberry bush as a warning to others not to
camp on his hunting ground? I am no coward, as I will speedily show you
if you want proof, but I will not camp here. If you stay, you stay
alone.”

“I don’t want to stay,” Hugh replied quickly. “Devil or not, I don’t like
the place. We’ll go on till we find a better camping ground.”

In the light of the afterglow, which was tinting sky and water with pale
gold, soft rose and lavender, and tender blue, they launched their canoe
again and paddled on. The peace and beauty around him made the sinister
thing he had found under the raspberry bush, and the evil deed that thing
suggested, seem unreal to Hugh, almost as unreal as the devil who lived
at the lake and walked down the river to his fishing. Nevertheless he
turned his eyes from the soft colors of sky and water to scan the shore
the canoe was skirting. Not a trace of the wrecked bateau appeared,
though both boys watched closely.

Several miles beyond the Devil Track River, they made camp on a sloping
rock shore wooded with spruce and balsam, where nothing worse than a
plague of greedy mosquitoes disturbed their rest. Hugh thought of
suggesting that the horde of voracious insects might have been sent by
the evil spirit of Devil Track Lake to torment the trespassers. Fearing
however that a humorous treatment of his story might offend the halfbreed
lad’s sensitive pride, he kept the fancy to himself.

Going on with their journey the next morning, the two came to the spot
known to the French fur traders and to the English who followed them as
the Grand Marais, the great marsh or meadow. There a long sand and gravel
point connects with a low, marshy shore, a higher, rocky stretch, once a
reef or island, running at right angles to the gravel spit. The T-shaped
projection forms a good harbor for small boats. Closely scanning every
foot of beach and rock shore, Hugh and Blaise paddled around the T. On
the inner side of the spit, they caught sight of what appeared to be part
of a boat half buried in the sand and gravel. They landed to investigate.
The thing was indeed the shattered remnants of a wreck, old and weathered
and deep in sand and pebbles. It was not Jean Beaupré’s boat, but a birch
canoe.

Leaving the T, the lads skirted the low, curving shore. When they rounded
the little point beyond, they discovered that the waves, which had been
increasing for some hours, had reached a height dangerous to a small
boat. The time was past noon, and Blaise thought that the sea would not
be likely to go down before sunset. So he gave the word to turn back and
seek a camping ground. In the angle of the T just where the sand spit
joined the rocky reef, they found shelter.

Realizing that they must conserve their scanty food supply, the two,
instead of eating at once, went fishing in the sheltered water. Hugh, in
the stern of the canoe, held the hand line, while Blaise paddled. Luck
was with them and when they went ashore an hour later they had four fine
trout, the smallest about three and the largest at least eight pounds. In
one thing at least, cooking fish, Hugh excelled his younger brother. He
set about broiling part of his catch as soon as he had cleaned them.
Without touching their other supplies, the lads made a hearty meal of
trout.

The wind did not fall till after sunset. Knowing it would be some hours
before the lake would be calm enough for canoe travel, the boys prepared
to stay where they were till morning. The night was unusually mild for
the time of year, so they stretched themselves under their canoe and let
the fire burn itself out.




                                   IX
                           THE GIANT IROQUOIS


At dawn Hugh woke and found his half-brother stirring.

“I go to see how the lake appears,” Blaise explained.

“I’ll go with you,” was Hugh’s reply, and Blaise nodded assent.

They crawled out from under the canoe, and, leaving the beach, climbed up
the rocky cross bar of the T-shaped point. The younger boy in the lead,
they crossed the rough, rock summit, pushing their way among stunted
evergreens and bushes now leafed out into summer foliage. Suddenly Blaise
paused, turned his head and laid his finger on his lips. Hugh strained
his ears to listen, but could catch no sound but the whining cry of a
sea-gull and the rippling of the water on the outer rocks. Blaise had
surely heard something, for he dropped on hands and knees and crept
forward. Hugh followed in the same manner, trying to move as noiselessly
as the Indian lad. With all his caution, he could not avoid a slight
rustling of undergrowth and bushes. Blaise turned his head again to
repeat his gesture of silence.

After a few yards of this cautious progress, Blaise came to a stop.
Crawling up beside his brother, Hugh found himself on the edge of a steep
rock declivity. Lying flat, screened by an alder and a small balsam fir,
he looked out across the water. He saw what Blaise had heard. Only a few
hundred feet away were two canoes, three men in each. Even at that short
distance Hugh could barely detect the sound of the dipping paddles and
the water rippling about the prows. His respect for his half-brother’s
powers of hearing increased.

The sun had not yet risen, but the morning was clear of fog or haze. As
the first canoe passed, the figures of the men stood out clear against
lake and sky. Hugh’s attention was attracted to the man in the stern.
Indeed that man was too notable and unusual a figure to escape attention.
A gigantic fellow, he towered, even in his kneeling position, a good foot
above his companions. A long eagle feather upright from the band about
his head made him appear still taller, while his huge shoulders and
big-muscled arms were conspicuous as he wielded his paddle on the left
side of the canoe.

Hugh heard Blaise at his side draw a quick breath. “Ohrante!” he
whispered in his elder brother’s ear. “Do not stir!”

Obeying that whispered command, Hugh lay motionless, bearing with Spartan
fortitude the stinging of the multitude of mosquitoes that surrounded
him. When both canoes had rounded a point farther up the shore and
vanished from sight, Blaise rose to his feet. Hugh followed his example,
and they made their way back across the rocks in silence. By the time
camp was reached, the elder brother was almost bursting with curiosity.
Who was the huge Indian, and why had Blaise been so startled, even
frightened, at the sight of him?

“Who is Ohrante?” Hugh asked, as he helped to lift the canoe from the
poles that propped it.

“He is more to be feared than the devil of the lake himself,” was the
grim reply. Then briefly Blaise told how the big Indian, the summer
before, had treacherously robbed and slain a white trader and had
severely wounded his Ojibwa companion, scalped him and left him to die.
The wounded man had not died, though he would always be a cripple. He had
told the tale of the attack, and a party of Ojibwas, led by Hugh’s
father, had pursued Ohrante and captured him. They were taking him back
to stand trial by Indian law or to be turned over to white justice,—there
was some disagreement between Jean Beaupré and his companions as to which
course should be followed,—when the giant made his escape through the
help of two of the party who secretly sympathized with him and had fled
with him. From that day until this morning, when he had recognized the
big Indian in the passing canoe, Blaise had heard nothing of Ohrante.

“But two men went with him when he fled,” the boy concluded. “Now he has
five. He is bold to return so soon. I am glad he goes up the shore, not
down. I should not wish to follow him or have him follow us. He hated our
father and nothing would please him more than to get us in his hands. I
hope my mother is with others, a strong party. I think Ohrante will not
risk an encounter with the Ojibwas again so soon, unless it be with two
or three only.”

“Isn’t he an Ojibwa himself?” Hugh asked.

“No, he is a Mohawk, one of the Iroquois wolves the Englishmen have
brought into the Ojibwa country to hunt and trap for the Old Company. It
is said his mother was an Ojibwa captive, but Ohrante is an evil Iroquois
all through.”

“Monsieur Cadotte says the bringing in of Iroquois hunters is unwise
policy,” Hugh remarked.

“The company never did a worse thing,” Blaise replied passionately. “The
Iroquois hunters trap and shoot at all seasons of the year. They are
greedy for pelts good and bad, and care not how quickly they strip the
country of beasts of all kinds. If the company brings in many more of
these thieving Iroquois, the Ojibwa, to whom the land belongs, will soon
be left without furs or food.”

“That is short-sighted policy for the company itself, it seems to me,”
commented Hugh.

“So our father said. He too hated the Iroquois intruders. He told the men
of the company they did ill to bring strange hunters into lands where
they had no right. Let the Iroquois keep to their own hunting grounds.
Here they do nothing but harm, and Ohrante is the worst of them all.”

Hugh had scarcely heard the last part of the lad’s speech. His mind was
occupied with a thought which had just come to him. “Do you think,” he
asked suddenly, “that it was Ohrante who killed father?”

“I had not thought it till I saw him passing by,” Blaise replied gravely.
“I believed it might be another enemy. Now I know not what to think. I
cannot believe the traders have brought Ohrante back to hunt and trap for
them. And my heart is troubled for my mother. Once when she was a girl
she was a captive among the Sioux. To be captured by Ohrante would be
even worse, and now there is no Jean Beaupré to take her away.”

“Do you mean that father rescued her from the Sioux?” Hugh asked in
surprise.

“He found her among the Sioux far south of here on the great river. She
was sad because she had been taken from her own people. So he bought her
from the chief who wished to make her his squaw. Then our father brought
her to the Grand Portage. There the priest married them. She was very
young then, young and beautiful. She is not old even now, and she is
still beautiful,” Blaise added proudly.

Hugh had listened to this story with amazement. Had he misjudged his own
father? Was it to be wondered at that the warm-hearted young Frenchman
should have taken the only possible way to save the sad Ojibwa girl from
captivity among the cruel Sioux? The elder son felt ashamed of his bitter
thoughts. Blaise loved his mother and was anxious about her. Hugh tried
to comfort his younger brother as well as he could.

“The willow wand showed that your mother had gone up the shore,” he
hastened to say. “Ohrante is not coming from that way, but from the
opposite direction, and there are no women in his canoes. Surely your
mother is among friends by this time, and Ohrante, the outlaw, will never
dare attack them.”

“That is true,” Blaise replied. “She cannot have fallen into his hands,
and he, with so few followers, will not dare make open war.” He was
silent for a moment. Then he said earnestly, “There is but one thing for
us to do. We must first find the wreck and the cache, as our father bade
us. Then we must track down his murderer.”

Hugh nodded in perfect agreement. “Let us get our breakfast and be away
then.”

Blaise was untying the package of maple sugar. He took out a piece and
handed it to Hugh. “We make no fire here,” he said abruptly. “The
Iroquois is not yet far away. He might see the smoke. We will go now.
When the wind rises again we can eat.”

Hugh was hungry, but he had no wish to attract the attention of the huge
Mohawk and his band. So he made no objection, but nibbled his lump of
sugar as he helped to load the canoe and launch it. Before the sun peeped
over the far-away line where lake and sky met, the two lads were well on
their way again.

Historian R.B. Cribb argues that Gandhi's thought evolved over time, with his early ideas becoming the core or scaffolding for his mature philosophy. In London he committed himself to truthfulness, temperance, chastity, and vegetarianism. His return to India to work as a lawyer was a failure, so he went to South Africa for a quarter century, where he absorbed ideas from many sources, most of them non-Indian.[136] Gandhi grew up in an eclectic religious atmosphere and throughout his life searched for insights from many religious traditions.[137] He was exposed to Jain ideas through his mother who, was in contact with Jain monks. Themes from Jainism that Gandhi absorbed included asceticism; compassion for all forms of life; the importance of vows for self-discipline; vegetarianism; fasting for self-purification; mutual tolerance among people of different creeds; and "syadvad", the idea that all views of truth are partial, a doctrine that lies at the root of Satyagraha.[138] He received much of his influence from Jainism particularly during his younger years.[139]
Gandhi's London experience provided a solid philosophical base focused on truthfulness, temperance, chastity, and vegetarianism. When he returned to India in 1891, his outlook was parochial and he could not make a living as a lawyer. This challenged his belief that practicality and morality necessarily coincided. By moving in 1893 to South Africa he found a solution to this problem and developed the central concepts of his mature philosophy.[140] N. A. Toothi[141] felt that Gandhi was influenced by the reforms and teachings of Swaminarayan, stating "Close parallels do exist in programs of social reform based on to non-violence, truth-telling, cleanliness, temperance and upliftment of the masses."[142] Vallabhbhai Patel, who grew up in a Swaminarayan household was attracted to Gandhi due to this aspect of Gandhi's doctrine.[143]
Gandhi's ethical thinking was heavily influenced by a handful of books, which he repeatedly meditated upon. They included especially Plato's Apology, (which he translated into his native Gujarati); William Salter's Ethical Religion (1889); Henry David Thoreau's On the Duty of Civil Disobedience (1847); Leo Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God Is Within You (1893); and John Ruskin's Unto this Last (1862), which he also translated into Gujarati. Ruskin inspired his decision to live an austere life on a commune, at first on the Phoenix Farm in Natal and then on the Tolstoy Farm just outside Johannesburg, South Africa.[144]
Balkrishna Gokhale argues that Gandhi took his philosophy of history from Hinduism and Jainism, supplemented by selected Christian traditions and ideas of Tolstoy and Ruskin. Hinduism provided central concepts of God's role in history, of man as the battleground of forces of virtue and sin, and of the potential of love as an historical force. From Jainism, Gandhi took the idea of applying nonviolence to human situations and the theory that Absolute Reality can be comprehended only relatively in human affairs.[145]
Historian Howard Spodek argues for the importance of the culture of Gujarat in shaping Gandhi's methods. Spodek finds that some of Gandhi's most effective methods such as fasting, noncooperation and appeals to the justice and compassion of the rulers were learned as a youth in Gujarat. Later on, the financial, cultural, organizational and geographical support needed to bring his campaigns to a national audience were drawn from Ahmedabad and Gujarat, his Indian residence 1915–1930.[146]



                                   X
                          THE LOOMING SAILBOAT


Though favored by the weather most of the time for several days in
succession, the brothers went ahead but slowly. The discovery of the worn
moccasin and the stained tunic had raised their hopes of finding the
wrecked bateau soon. At any moment they might come upon it. Accordingly
they were even more vigilant than before, anxiously scanning every foot
of open shore, bay, cove, stream mouth and island.

One evening before sunset, they reached a beautiful bay with small
islands and wooded shores, where they caught sight of a group of bark
lodges. Blaise proposed that they land and bargain for provisions. There
proved to be about a dozen Indians in the encampment, men, squaws and
children. Luckily two deer and a yearling moose had been killed the day
before, and Blaise, after some discussion in Ojibwa, succeeded in
obtaining a piece of fresh venison and another of moose meat. The Indians
refused Hugh’s offer of payment in money, preferring to exchange the meat
for ammunition for their old, flint-lock muskets. They were from the deep
woods of the interior, unused to frequenting trading posts, and with no
idea of money, but they understood the value of powder and shot.

To one of the men Blaise spoke of having seen the outlaw Ohrante. The
Ojibwa replied that he had heard Ohrante had come from his hiding place
seeking vengeance on those who had captured him. He had never seen the
giant Iroquois, the man said, but he had heard that it was through his
great powers as a medicine man that he had escaped from his captors.
Without divulging that he was the son of the man who had led the
expedition against Ohrante, Blaise asked the Indian if he knew when and
where the outlaw had first been seen since his exile.

“I was told he was here at this Bay of the Beaver late in the Moon of the
Snow Crust,” the Ojibwa replied, and the boy’s hazel eyes gleamed.

Not until they had made camp did Blaise tell Hugh of the information he
had received.

“In the Moon of the Snow Crust!” the latter cried. “That is February or
March, isn’t it? And it was late in March that father died!”

The younger boy nodded. “Ohrante killed him, that I believe. Some day,
some day——” Blaise left the sentence unfinished, but his elder brother
had no doubt of the meaning. Hugh’s heart, like the younger lad’s, was
hot against his father’s murderer, but he remembered the powerful figure
of the Iroquois standing out dark against the dawn. How and when would
the day come?

After thoroughly exploring the Bay of the Beaver that night, the boys
were off shortly after dawn the next morning. Just as the sun was coming
up, reddening the white mist that lay upon the gently rippling water,
they paddled out of the bay. As they rounded the southern point, Blaise
uttered a startled exclamation.

Hugh, in the stern, looked up from his paddle. “A ship!” he cried.

Coming directly towards them, the light breeze scarce filling her sail,
was a ship. So high she loomed through the morning mist Hugh thought she
must be at least as large as the _Otter_, though she seemed to have but
one square sail. What was a ship doing here, so far south of the
Kaministikwia and even of the Grand Portage? Did she belong to some of
the Yankee traders who were now invading the Superior region? Hugh knew
he had been in United States waters ever since passing the mouth of the
Pigeon River.

And then, as the canoe and the ship approached one another, a curious
thing happened. The ship shrank. She was no longer as large as the
_Otter_. She was much smaller. She was not a ship at all, only a wooden
boat with a sail. There was something about the light and the atmospheric
conditions, the rising sun shining through the morning mist, that had
deceived the eye and caused the approaching craft to appear far taller
than it really was.

The sailboat was coming slowly in the light wind. As the boys paddled
past, they saw it was a small, flat-sided, wooden boat pointed at both
ends. It was well loaded and carried three men. Hugh shouted a greeting
and an inquiry. A tall fellow in blanket coat and scarlet cap, who was
steering, replied in a big, roaring voice and bad French, that they were
from the Fond du Lac bound for the Kaministikwia.

Blaise had been even more amazed than Hugh at the deceptive appearance of
the sailboat. When they landed later to inspect a stream mouth, the
half-breed said seriously that some spirit of the lake must have been
playing tricks with them. He wondered if one of the men aboard that
bateau was using magic.

“I doubt that,” Hugh answered promptly. “I think the queer light, the
sunrise through the mist, deceived our eyes and made the boat look
taller. Once on the way from Michilimackinac to the Sault, we saw
something like that. A small, bare rock ahead of us stretched up like a
high island. The Captain said he had seen the same thing before in that
very same spot. He called it ‘looming,’ but he did not think there was
anything magical about it.”

Blaise made no reply, but Hugh doubted if the lad had been convinced.

Several times during the rest of the trip down shore, the boys met canoes
loaded with trappers and traders or with families of Indians journeying
to the Grand Portage or to the New Fort. The two avoided conversation
with the strangers, as they did not care to answer questions about
themselves or their destination.

The journey was becoming wearisome indeed. The minuteness of the search
and the delays from bad weather prolonged the time. Moreover the store of
food was scant. The lads fished and hunted whenever possible without too
greatly delaying progress, but their luck was poor. Seldom were they able
to satisfy their hearty appetites. They lay down hungry under the stars
and took up their paddles at chilly dawn with no breakfast but a bit of
maple sugar. Hugh grew lean and brown and hard muscled. Except for the
redder hue of his tan, the light color of his hair and his gray eyes, he
might almost have been whole brother to Blaise. The older boy had become
expert with the paddle and could hold his own for any length of time and
at any pace the half-breed set. As a camper he was nearly the Indian
lad’s equal and he prided himself on being a better cook. It would take
several years of experience and wilderness living, however, before he
could hope to compete with his younger brother in woodcraft, weather
wisdom or the handling of a canoe in rough water.

As mile after mile of carefully searched shore line passed, without sign
of the wrecked bateau or trace of Jean Beaupré’s having come that way,
the boys grew more and more puzzled and anxious. Nevertheless they
persisted in their quest until they came at last to the Fond du Lac.

Fond du Lac means literally the “bottom of the lake,” but the name was
used by the early French explorers to designate the end or head of Lake
Superior, where the River St. Louis discharges and where the city of
Duluth now stands. To-day the name is no longer applied to the head of
the lake itself, but is restricted to the railway junction and town of
Fond du Lac several miles up the river. There was no town of Fond du Lac
or of Duluth in the days of this story. Wild, untamed, uninhabited, rose
the steep rock hills and terraces where part of the city now stands.

As they skirted the shore, the boys could see ahead of them a narrow line
stretching across the water to the southeast. That line was the long, low
point now known as Minnesota Point, a sand-bar that almost closes the
river mouth and served then, as it does now, to form a sheltered harbor.
Drawing nearer, they discovered that the long, sand point was by no means
bare, much of it being covered more or less thickly with bushes,
evergreens, aspens and willows. The two lads were weary, discouraged and
very hungry. Since their scanty breakfast of wild rice boiled with a
little fat, they had eaten nothing but a lump of sugar each, the last
remnant of their provisions. Nevertheless they paddled patiently along
the bar to the place where the river cut diagonally through it to reach
the lake. Entering the narrow channel, they passed through to absolutely
still water.

The sun was setting. Unless they went several miles farther to a trading
post or caught some fish, they must go to sleep hungry. They decided to
try the fishing. Luck with the lines had been poor throughout most of the
trip, but that night fortune favored the lads a little. In the shallower
water within the bar, they caught, in less than half an hour, two small,
pink-fleshed lake trout, which Hugh estimated at somewhat less than three
pounds each.

On the inner side of the point, the brothers ran their canoe upon the
sand beach. Then they kindled a fire and cooked their long delayed
supper. When the meal was over, nothing remained of the fish but heads,
fins, skin and bones.

Usually both fell asleep as soon as they were rolled in their blankets.
That night, on the low sand-bar, the mosquitoes came in clouds to the
attack, but it was not the annoying insects that kept the boys awake.
They wanted to talk over their situation.

“It seems,” Hugh said despondently, “that we have failed. That wrecked
boat must have been battered to pieces and washed out into the lake. Our
only chance of discovering the cache was to find the boat, and that
chance seems to be gone.”

“There is still one other chance, my brother,” Blaise replied quietly.
“Have you forgotten what we found at the River of Devil Tracks? We must
go back there and make search again.”

“You are right,” was Hugh’s quick rejoinder. “We didn’t find any sign of
the boat, yet it may once have been there or near by.”

Blaise nodded. “The bateau was perhaps driven on the bar at the river
mouth and afterwards washed out into the lake. We must make speed back
there. But, Hugh, if it was Ohrante who killed our father, he may also
have found the furs.”

“And carried them away.” Hugh slapped savagely at a mosquito. “I have
thought of that. I believe in my heart that Ohrante killed father. Yet
the murderer may not have taken the furs. Father told you he was wrecked
in a storm, and, unable to carry the furs with him, he hid them. That
much you say he made clear. When and where he was attacked we do not
know, but I believe it must have been after he cached the furs. When he
told of the wreck and the hiding of the pelts, he said nothing of his
wound?”

“Nothing then or afterwards of the wound or how he got it. He bade me
seek you out and find the furs and the packet. When I asked him how he
came by the hurt, he was beyond replying.”

Both boys were silent a moment listening to the howling of a lonely wolf
far off in the high hills to the north.

Then Hugh said emphatically, “We must go back and search every inch of
ground about that river. We will not give up while a chance remains of
finding the cache,” he added with stubborn determination.




                                   XI
                           THE FIRE-LIT ORGY


Before starting back the way they had come, the brothers had to have
provisions. Early the next morning they went up the St. Louis River.
Beyond the bar the river widened to two miles or more. In midstream the
current was strong, but Hugh steered into the more sluggish water just
outside the lily pads, reeds and grass of the low shore. About three
miles above the mouth, a village of bark lodges was passed, where
sharp-nosed dogs ran out to yelp and growl at the canoe.

A short distance beyond the Indian village stood the log fort and trading
post of the Old Northwest Company’s Fond du Lac station, one of several
posts that were still maintained in United States territory. The two boys
landed and attempted to buy provisions. Blaise was not known to the clerk
in charge, and Hugh, when asked, gave his middle name of MacNair. Jean
Beaupré had passed this post on his way down the river, and the lads did
not know what conversation or controversy he might have had with the Old
Company’s men. So they thought it wise to say nothing of their
relationship to the elder Beaupré. Brought up to be truthful and
straightforward, Hugh found it difficult to evade the clerk’s questions.
The older boy left most of the talking to the younger, who had his share
of the Indian’s wiliness and secretiveness. Blaise saw nothing wrong in
deceiving enemies and strangers in any way he found convenient. To Hugh,
brother and comrade, Blaise would have scorned to lie, but he did not
scruple to let the Northwest Company’s man think that he and Hugh were on
their way from the south shore to the Kaministikwia in the hope of taking
service with the Old Company.

The post could spare but little in the way of provisions. Less than a
half bushel of hulled corn, a few pounds of wild rice, left from the
supply brought the preceding autumn from the south shore, and a very
small piece of salt pork were all the clerk could be persuaded to part
with. As they were leaving he gave the boys a friendly warning.

“Watch out,” he said, “for an Iroquois villain and his band. They are
reported to be lingering along the north shore and they are a bad lot. He
used to be a hunter for the company, but he murdered a white man and is
an outcast now, a fugitive from justice. The rascal is called Ohrante. If
you catch sight of a huge giant of an Indian, lie low and get out of his
way as soon and as fast as you can.”

On the way back to the river mouth, the lads stopped at the Indian
village. After much bargaining in Ojibwa, Blaise secured a strip of dried
venison, as hard as a board, and a bark basket of sugar. To these people
the lad spoke of the warning the clerk had given him, but they could tell
him no more of the movements of Ohrante than he already knew.

The brothers were glad to get away from the Indian encampment and out on
the river again. The village was unkempt, and disgustingly dirty and ill
smelling. It was evident that most of the men and some of the squaws were
just recovering from a debauch on the liquor they had obtained from the
traders.

“They are ruining the Ojibwa people, those traders,” Blaise said angrily,
after the two had paddled a short distance down-stream. “Once an Ojibwa
gets the habit of strong drink, he will give all he has for it. The rival
companies contend for the furs, and each promises more and stronger
liquor than the other. So the evil grows worse and worse. In the end, as
our father said, it will ruin the Ojibwa altogether.”

Hugh did not reply for a moment, then he said hesitatingly, “Did father
buy pelts with drink?”

“Not the way most of the others do,” Blaise replied promptly. “Liquor he
had to give sometimes, as all traders must, now the custom is started,
but our father gave only a little at a time and not strong. Whenever he
could he bought his furs with other things. Always he was a friend to the
Ojibwa. He became one of us when he married into the nation, and he was a
good son, not like some white men who take Ojibwa wives. Many friends he
had, and some enemies, but few dared stand against him. He was a strong
man and a true one.”

Blaise spoke proudly. Once again Hugh, though glad to hear so much good
of his adventurous father, felt a pang of jealousy that the half-breed
boy should have known and loved him so well.

Departure was delayed by rain and a brisk wind from the lake, that swayed
and bent the trees on the exposed bar, drove the waves high on the outer
shore and blew the sand into food and cooking fire. Not until late
afternoon of the next day did Hugh and Blaise succeed in getting away.
They paddled till midnight and, determined to make the greatest possible
speed up the shore, took but four hours’ rest. All the following day they
travelled steadily, then camped at a stream mouth and were away again at
dawn. Bad weather delayed them that day, however, and caused a late start
next morning. Eager to get ahead, they did not land to prepare food until
mid-afternoon. After the meal and a rest of not more than a half hour,
they resumed their paddles.

Even the going down of the sun did not persuade them to cease their
labor. There would be no moon till towards morning, but the brothers
paddled on through the darkening twilight. The wind was light, merely
rippling the water, and they wanted to get as far on their way as
possible.

Blaise, in the bow, was still steadily plying his blade, when, through
the blackness of the gathering night, he caught sight of a spark of
light. He uttered an exclamation and pointed to the light with his
paddle.

“A camp,” he said, speaking softly as if he feared being overheard even
at that distance. “It is best to avoid it.”

As they went on, the light grew stronger and brighter. A fire was blazing
in an open spot on an island or point. Tiny black figures became visible
against the flames. The sounds of shouts and yells were borne across the
water. Something out of the ordinary was going on. That was no mere
cooking fire, but a huge pile, the flames lighting up the land and water.
Around the blaze, the black figures were capering and yelling. Was it
some orgy of devils? Had the place where the fire burned been near the
Devil Track River, even Hugh might have thought this a feast of fiends.
But it was some miles away from the Devil Track. Moreover, his ears
assured him that the yells, sounding louder and louder, were from the
throats of men, not of spirits.

Blaise had been considering his whereabouts. With the Indian’s keen sense
of location and accurate memory of ground he has been over, he had
concluded that the place where the fire burned was the rocky end of an
island he remembered passing on the way down. The island lay close in,
only a narrow waterway separating it from the heavily wooded main shore
where trees grew down to the water’s edge.

Paddles dipped and raised noiselessly, the canoe slipped through the
water. Blaise set the pace, and Hugh kept the craft close in the shadow
of the wooded mainland. As they drew nearer the island, Blaise raised his
blade and held it motionless. Hugh immediately did the same. The canoe,
under good headway, slipped by, without a sound that could be
distinguished from the rippling of the water on the rocks of the island.
Hidden in the blackness beyond the circle of wavering firelight, the two
gazed on a fear-inspiring scene.

Close to the leaping flames, lighted clearly by the glare, rose the white
stem of a tall birch. Tied to the tree was a man, his naked body red
bronze in the firelight and streaked with darker color. Five or six other
figures were leaping and yelling like fiends about the captive, darting
in on him now and again to strike a blow with club, knife or fire brand.
The meaning of the horrid scene was plain enough. An unlucky Indian
captive was being tortured to death.

It was not the tortured man, however, or the human fiends dancing about
him that held Hugh’s fascinated gaze. Motionless, arms folded, another
figure stood a little back from the fire, a towering form, gigantic in
the flickering light.

Paddles raised, rigid as statues, scarcely daring to breathe, the two
lads remained motionless until the slackening and swerving of their craft
made it necessary for Blaise to dip his blade cautiously. They were
beyond the fire now and still in the deep shadow of the overhanging
trees. But the waterway between shore and island was narrow. Until they
had put a greater distance between themselves and the hideous, fire-lit
picture, they could feel no assurance of security. Keeping close to
shore, they used the utmost caution. At last a bend in the mainland, with
a corresponding curve in the island, hid the fire from sight. Looking
back, they could still see the light of the flames through the trees and
on the water, but the blazing pile itself was hidden from view.

Even then the two boys relaxed their caution but little. Near exhaustion
though they were, they paddled on and on, with aching muscles and heads
nodding with sleep. Not until they were several miles away from the
island orgy of Ohrante and his band, did the brothers dare to land and
rest. Too weary to cook a meal, each ate a lump of maple sugar, sucked a
bit of the hard, unchewable, dried venison, rolled himself in his blanket
and slept.




                                  XII
                          THE HUNGRY PORCUPINE


Hugh was alone in a canoe struggling to make headway against the waves.
Bearing down upon him, with the roaring of the storm wind, was an
enormous black craft with a gigantic form towering in the bow and
menacing him with a huge knife. The boy was trying to turn his canoe, but
in spite of all his efforts, it kept heading straight for the terrifying
figure.

From somewhere far away a voice shouted, “Hugh, Hugh.” The shouts grew
louder. Hugh woke suddenly to find his half-brother shaking him by the
shoulder. Storm voices filled the air, wind roared through the trees,
surf thundered on the rocks. A big wave, curling up the beach, wet his
moccasins as he struggled to his feet.

Wide awake in an instant, Hugh seized his blanket and fled up over the
smooth, rounded pebbles out of reach of the waves. In a moment he
realized that Blaise was not with him. He looked back—and then he
remembered. The supplies, the canoe, where were they? He and his brother
had unloaded the canoe as usual the night before, had propped it up on
the paddles, and had crawled under it. But, overcome with weariness, they
had left the packets of food and ammunition lying where they had been
tossed, on the lower beach. Now, in the dull light of dawn, Hugh could
see the waves rolling in and breaking far above where the packages had
been dropped. The canoe had disappeared. It took him but a moment to
grasp all this. He ran back down the beach to join Blaise, who was
plunging in to his knees in the attempt to rescue what he could.

“The canoe?” Hugh shouted.

“Safe,” Blaise replied briefly, and made a dash after a retreating wave,
seizing a skin bag of corn just as it was floating away.

At the same instant Hugh caught sight of a packet of powder, and darted
after it, a bitter cold wave breaking over him just as he bent to snatch
the packet.

The two worked with frantic haste, heedless of the waves that soaked them
above the knees and sometimes broke clear over their heads as they
stooped to seize bag or package. They saved what they could, but the
dried meat, one sack of corn, Hugh’s bundle of extra clothing, the roll
of birch bark and the pine gum for repairing the canoe, had all gone out
into the lake. The maple sugar was partly dissolved. Some of the powder,
though the wrapping was supposed to be water-proof, was soaked, and
Hugh’s gun, which he had carelessly left with the other things, was so
wet it would have to be dried and oiled before it could be used. Blaise
had carried his gun to bed with him, and it was safe and dry.

Even the half-breed boy, who usually woke at the slightest sound, had
been so tired and had slept so heavily that the rising of the wind and
the pounding of the waves had not disturbed him. It was not until a
strong gust lifted the canoe from over his head, and a falling paddle
struck him sharply, that he woke. He had sprung up, seized the overturned
canoe and carried it to the shelter of a large rock. Then he had
returned, flung his gun and the paddles farther up the beach, and had
aroused the still sleeping Hugh.

When everything they had rescued had been carried beyond the reach of the
waves and placed in the lee of a rock out of the wind, the two boys
skirted the beach in the hope that the meat, corn or clothes might have
been cast up in some other spot. The beach, at the head of a small and
shallow cove, was not long. When Hugh had gone as far over pebbles and
boulders as he could, he scrambled up the rock point that bounded the
cove on the north and followed it to the end, without seeing anything of
the lost articles. As he reached the bare rock tip, the sun was just
coming up among red and angry clouds across the water, flushing with
crimson and orange the wildly heaving waves. The wind was a little east
of north. No rain had fallen where the boys were camped, but Hugh felt
sure from the clouds that a storm must have passed not many miles away.
The little cove being open and unprotected to the northeast, the full
force of the wind entered it and piled the waves upon the beach.

When Hugh returned to the camping place, he found that Blaise, who had
gone in the other direction, had had no better luck. The strong under
pull of the retreating waves had carried the lost articles out to deep
water.

Going on with the journey in such a blow was out of the question. The
boys made themselves as comfortable as possible behind a heap of boulders
out of the wind.

“I wish we knew in which direction Ohrante is bound,” Hugh said, as he
scraped the last morsel of his scanty portion of corn porridge from his
bark dish, with the crude wooden spoon he had carved for himself.

“He went up the shore as we came down,” Blaise replied. “He is probably
going down now. Somewhere he has met his enemies and has taken one
prisoner at least.”

“I wish we might have travelled farther before camping,” Hugh returned.

Blaise shrugged in his French fashion. “He cannot go on in this weather,
and we cannot either. Passing him last night was a great risk. I knew
that all their eyes would be blinded by the fire glare, so they could not
see into the shadows, else I should not have dared. All went well, yet we
must still be cautious and make but small fires and little smoke.”

“No column of smoke can ascend high enough in this gale to be seen,” Hugh
argued.

“But the smell will travel far, and the wind blows from us to them.
Caution is never wasted, my brother.”

Forced to discontinue the journey for most of the day, the lads spent the
time seeking food. They were far enough from Ohrante’s camp to have
little fear that any of his party would hear their shots, yet they chose
to hunt to the north rather than to the south. With some of the dry
powder and the shot that had been saved, Blaise started out first, while
Hugh spread the wet powder to dry on a flat rock exposed to the sun but
sheltered from the wind. Then he cleaned and dried his gun and greased it
with pork fat before leaving camp.

Hugh wandered the woods in search of game for several hours. He did not
go far back from shore. Traversing the thick woods, where there was much
undergrowth, was difficult and he did not greatly trust his own
woodcraft. He had no wish to humiliate himself in his half-brother’s eyes
by losing his way. Moreover, as long as he kept where the wind reached
him, he was not much annoyed by the mosquitoes, at their worst in June.
Whenever he reached a spot where the wind did not penetrate, the
irritating insects came about him in clouds, settling on his hands, face,
wrists and neck and even getting inside his rather low necked, deerskin
shirt.

Whether he did not go far enough into the woods or for some other reason,
his luck was not good. He shot a squirrel and a long-eared, northern hare
or snowshoe rabbit and missed another, but did not catch a glimpse of
deer, moose, or bear. Neither squirrel nor rabbit meat was at its best in
June, but it was at least better than no meat at all. Carrying his meager
bag, he returned late in the afternoon. He found Blaise squatting over a
small cooking fire. The iron kettle gave out a most appetizing odor. The
younger boy had secured three plump ruffed grouse. In the Lake Superior
wilderness of that day no laws prohibited the shooting of game birds out
of season. The stew which appealed so strongly to Hugh’s nostrils was
made up of grouse and squirrel meat, with a very little salt pork to give
it savor.

The wind had fallen and since noon the waves had been going down. By
sunset, though the lake was by no means smooth, travel had become
possible for skilled canoeists. Had Hugh and Blaise not been in such a
hurry to put distance between themselves and Ohrante, they would have
waited until morning. They were so anxious to go on that they launched
the canoe while the afterglow was still reflected in pink and lavender on
the eastern sky. A few miles would bring them to the Devil Track River,
but, not choosing to camp in that evil spot, Blaise insisted on landing
about a mile below the stream mouth.

Leaving their camp early next morning, the two started overland to the
Devil Track. All day long they sought for some trace of the hidden cache.
Not until after sunset did they cease their efforts. Weary and
disheartened they returned to their camping place, Hugh in the lead. They
had left the canoe turned bottom up over their supplies and well
concealed by a thicket of red-stemmed osier dogwoods. The elder brother’s
sharp exclamation when he reached the spot made the younger one hasten to
his side.

“Look!” cried Hugh, pointing to the birch craft.

Blaise did not need to be told to look. The ragged, gaping hole in the
bark was too conspicuous. “A porcupine,” he exclaimed.

“It was the devil in the form of a porcupine, I think,” Hugh muttered.
“What possessed the beast?”

“He smelled the pork and gnawed his way through to it. The porcupine
loves all things salt. We will see.”

Blaise was right. When the canoe was lifted, the boys discovered that the
small chunk of salt pork was gone, taken out through the hole the beast
had gnawed. Nothing else was missing.

“Either he didn’t like the other things or the pork was all he could
carry away at one trip,” said Hugh. “If we had stayed away a little
longer, he might have made off with the corn and the sugar as well.”

“The loss of the pork is bad,” Blaise commented gravely. “The hole in the
canoe is bad also, and we must delay to mend it.”

The loss of the pork was indeed serious. The rabbit and the squirrel Hugh
had shot the day before had been eaten, and nothing else remained but a
few handfuls of corn and a little sugar. So once more, after setting some
snares, the lads went to sleep supperless. They slept with the corn and
sugar between them for protection.

Blaise might have suspected that the fiend of the river had put a spell
on his snares, for in the morning he found them all empty. The dry, stony
ground showed no tracks. If any long-legged hare had come that way, he
had been wary enough to avoid the nooses.

After the scantiest of breakfasts the boys set about repairing the canoe.
Luckily the ball of wattap, the fine, tough roots of the spruce prepared
for use as thread, had not been lost when the waves covered the beach at
their former camp. From a near-by birch Blaise cut a strong, smooth piece
of bark without knotholes. With his knife he trimmed the ragged edges of
the hole. Having softened and straightened his wattap by soaking it, he
sewed the patch on neatly, using a large steel needle he had bought at
the trading post at the Kaministikwia.

In the meantime Hugh sought a pine grove up the river, where he obtained
some chunks of resin. The resin he softened with heat to a sticky gum and
applied it to the seams and stitches. Blaise went over them again with a
live coal held in a split stick, and spread the softened resin skillfully
with thumb and knife blade. Then the canoe was left bottom side up for
the gum to dry and harden.

In spite of the fact that the boys, on their way down the shore, had
searched the land to the east of the Devil Track with considerable
thoroughness, they were determined to go over it again. By means of a
fallen tree and the boulders that rose above the foaming rapids, they
crossed the river where it narrowed between rock walls. Late in the
afternoon, Blaise, scrambling up a steep and stony slope well back from
the stream, heard two shots in quick succession and then a third at a
longer interval, the signal agreed upon to indicate that one or the other
had come across something significant. The sounds came from the direction
of the lake, and Blaise hastened down to the shore.




                                  XIII
                           THE PAINTED THWART


Blaise found Hugh stooping over a heap of shattered, water-stained
boards, crude planks, axe hewn from the tree.

“Can this be the boat, do you think?” Hugh asked.

Blaise shook his head doubtfully. “It was not here on the beach when we
came this way before.”

“Yet it may be part of the wreck washed from some outer rock and cast
here by that last hard blow,” reasoned the older boy.

“That is possible. If we could find more of it, the part that bears the
sign——”

“What sign? You told me of no sign. I have often wondered how, if we
found a wrecked boat, we should know whether it was the right one.”

“Surely I told you of the sign. The board that bears the hole for the
mast is painted with vermilion, and on it in black is our father’s sign,
the figure that means his Ojibwa name, ‘man with the bright eyes, the
eyes that make sparks.’ Twice the sign is there, once on each side of the
mast.”

Hugh was staring at his younger brother. Black figures on a vermilion
ground! Where had he seen such a thing, seen it recently, since he left
the Sault? Then he remembered. “Show me, Blaise,” he cried, “what that
figure looks like, that means father’s Indian name.”

Blaise picked up a smooth gray flake and with a bit of softer, dark red
stone scratched the figure.

“That is it,” Hugh exclaimed. “I have seen that wrecked boat, a bateau
with the thwart painted red and that very same figure drawn in black.”

“You have seen it?” The younger brother looked at the elder wonderingly.
“In your dreams?”

“No, I was wide awake, but it was a long way from here and before ever I
saw you, Blaise.” Rapidly Hugh related how he and Baptiste had examined
the old bateau in the cleft of the rocks of the Isle Royale.

Blaise listened in silence, only his eyes betraying his interest. “Truly
we know not where to search,” he said when Hugh had finished. “The bateau
drifted far. How can we find where it went upon the rocks?”

“I don’t believe it drifted far. If it was so badly damaged father had to
abandon it, could it have floated far? Surely it would have gone to the
bottom. When that boat was carried across to Isle Royale, I believe
father and Black Thunder were still in it with all their furs. The storm
drove them out into the lake, they lost their bearings, just as we in the
_Otter_ did. They were borne away and dashed by the waves into that crack
in the rocks. Near there somewhere we shall find the cache, if we find it
at all.”

Hugh spoke confidently, very sure of his own reasoning, but the younger
lad was not so easily convinced.

“How,” Blaise questioned, “did he come away from that island Minong if he
was wrecked there? He could not come by land and the bateau is still
there.”

“He made himself a dugout or birch canoe to cross in when the weather
cleared.”

“But then why came he not to Wauswaugoning by canoe?”

“Because,” persisted Hugh, “when he reached the mainland he fell in with
some enemy here at the Devil Track River. We know his wound was not
received in the wreck. You yourself say it was a knife wound. Black
Thunder wasn’t killed in the wreck either. They escaped unharmed but the
bateau was beyond repair. So they built a canoe and crossed to this
shore. Here they were set upon and Black Thunder was killed and father
sorely wounded.”

Again the sceptical Blaise shook his head. “Why were they away down here
so far below the Grand Portage? And why, if they had a canoe, brought
they not the furs and the packet with them?”

Hugh was aware of the weak links in his theory, yet he clung to it.
“Maybe they did bring them,” he said, “but couldn’t carry them overland,
so they hid them.”

“No, no. Our father told me that the furs were not far from the wreck. He
said that three or four times. I cannot be mistaken.”

“Perhaps their canoe wasn’t big enough to hold all of the pelts,” Hugh
speculated. “What they did bring may have fallen into Ohrante’s hands. So
father spoke only of the rest, hidden in a secret place near the wreck.
To me that seems reasonable enough. But,” he admitted honestly, “I don’t
quite understand how they came to be so far down the shore here, and, if
the packet is valuable, why didn’t father bring that with him if he
brought anything? And why didn’t he tell you that the storm drove him on
Isle Royale?”

“You forget,” Blaise said slowly, “that our father’s body was very weak
and his spirit just about to leave it. I asked him where to find the
bateau. He told me of the way it was marked, but he could say no more. I
think he could not hear my questions.”

Both lads were silent for several minutes, then Hugh said decisively,
“Well, Blaise, there are just two things we can do, unless we give up the
quest entirely. We can go back down the shore, searching the land for
some sign of the cache, or we can cross to Isle Royale, find the cleft in
the rocks where the bateau lies, and seek there for the furs and the
packet. I am for the latter plan. To search the whole shore from here to
the Fond du Lac for a hidden cache to which we have no clue seems to me a
hopeless task.”

“But to cross that long stretch of open water in a small canoe,” Blaise
returned doubtfully.

“We must choose good weather of course, and paddle our swiftest to reach
the island before a change comes. Perhaps we can rig some kind of sail
and make better time than with our paddles.”

It was plain that Hugh had made up his mind to return to Isle Royale.
Hitherto he had been content to let Blaise take the lead, but now he was
asserting his elder brother’s right to leadership. Better than his white
brother, Blaise understood the hazards of such an undertaking, but the
half-breed lad was proud. He was not going to admit himself less
courageous than his elder brother. If Hugh dared take the risk, he,
Little Caribou, as his mother’s people called him, dared take it also.

The brothers must provision themselves for the trip. Even if they reached
the island safely and in good time, they could not guess how long their
search might take, or how many days or weeks they might be delayed before
they could return. Fresh supplies might have reached the Grand Portage by
now and corn at least could be bought. From the Indians always to be
found near the posts, other food supplies and new moccasins might be
obtained.

Considering food supplies reminded the lads of their hunger. They decided
to devote the remaining hours of daylight to fishing for their supper.
They would start for the Grand Portage in the morning. Blaise paddled
slowly along a submerged reef some distance out from shore, while Hugh
fished.

In a very few minutes he felt a pull at his line. Hand over hand he
hauled it in, Blaise helping by managing the canoe so that the line did
not slacken even for an instant. Nearer and nearer Hugh drew his prize,
until he could see the gleaming silver of the big fish flashing through
the clear water. Then came the critical moment. He had no landing net,
and reaching over the side with net or gaff would have been a risk at
best. Without shifting his weight enough to destroy the balance, while
Blaise endeavored to hold the canoe steady with his paddle, Hugh must
land his fish squarely in the bottom. With a sudden swing, the long,
silvery, dark-flecked body, tail wildly flapping, was raised from the
water and flung into the canoe. Almost before it touched the bottom, Hugh
had seized his knife and dealt a swift blow. A few ineffectual flaps and
the big fish lay still.

“Fifteen pounds at least,” Hugh exulted. “I have seen larger trout, but
most of them were taken in nets.”

“They grow very big sometimes, two, three times as big, but it is not
good to catch such a big one with a line. Unless you have great luck, it
overturns your canoe.”

The sight of the big trout sharpened the boys’ hunger pangs and took away
all zest from further fishing. They paddled full speed for shore and
supper.

Favored by good weather they made a quick trip to the Grand Portage. In
the bay a small ship lay at anchor, and they knew supplies must have
arrived.

“That is not the _Otter_,” Hugh remarked as they paddled by.

“No, it is not one of the Old Company’s ships. I think it belongs to the
New Company.”

“I’m glad it isn’t the _Otter_,” Hugh replied. “I shouldn’t know how to
answer Baptiste’s questions.”

The ship proved, as Blaise had guessed, to belong to the New Company. She
sailed the day after the boys arrived, but had left ample supplies. They
had no difficulty in buying the needed stores, though Hugh’s money was
exhausted by the purchases. He left explanations to Blaise, confident
that his younger brother could not be persuaded to divulge the
destination or purpose of their trip.

Again bad weather held the lads at the Grand Portage and Wauswaugoning.
The last day of their stay, when they were returning from the New
Company’s post, they came upon the camp of the trappers whose bateau had
loomed like a ship through the morning mist when the boys were leaving
the Bay of the Beaver. Hugh recognized at once the tall fellow in the
scarlet cap who had replied to his shout of greeting. The trappers had
disposed of their furs at the Old Company’s post and were about to leave.
They were going to portage their supplies to Fort Charlotte above the
falls of the Pigeon River and go up the river in a canoe. Hugh inquired
what they intended to do with their small bateau which was drawn up on
the shore.

“You want it?” the leader questioned in his big voice.

“Will you sell it?” the boy asked eagerly.

The man nodded. “What you give?”

Hugh flushed with chagrin, remembering that all his money was gone.
Blaise came to the rescue by offering to trade some ammunition for the
boat. The man shook his head. Blaise added to his offer a small quantity
of food supplies, but still the fellow refused. “Too little,” he
grumbled, then added something in his curious mixture of Scotch-English
and Ojibwa. He was a Scotch half-breed and Hugh found his dialect
difficult to understand.

Blaise shrugged, walked over to the boat and examined it. He turned
towards the man and spoke in rapid Ojibwa. The fellow answered in the
same tongue, pointing to the lad’s gun.

“What does he say?” asked Hugh.

“I told him his bateau needs mending,” Blaise answered in French, “but he
will not trade for anything but my gun, which is better than his. I will
not give him the gun. Our father gave it to me.”

Hugh understood his half-brother’s feeling, but he was eager to secure
the boat. “He may have my gun,” he whispered. He knew that the tall
fellow understood some French. “Tell him if he will include the sail—he
had one, you know—I’ll give him my gun and some ammunition. Mine doesn’t
shoot as accurately as yours, but it looks newer.”

Blaise made the offer in Ojibwa, Hugh repeated it in English, and after
an unsuccessful attempt to get more, the man agreed. He put into the boat
the mast and canvas, which he had been using as a shelter, and Hugh
handed over the gun and ammunition.

The rest of the day was spent in making a few necessary repairs to the
bateau, and the following morning, before a light southwest breeze, the
lads set sail. Blaise knew nothing of this sort of water travel, but Hugh
had handled a sailboat before, though never one quite so clumsy as this
crude, heavy bateau. The boat was pointed at both ends, flat bottomed and
built of thick, hand-hewn boards. It carried a small, square sail on a
stubby mast. With axe and knife Hugh had made a crude rudder and had
lashed it to the stern in the place of the paddle the trappers had been
content to steer with. Blaise quickly learned to handle the rudder,
leaving Hugh free to manage the sail. It was a satisfaction to the older
boy to find something in which he excelled his younger brother and could
take the lead. It restored his self-respect as the elder. Blaise, on the
other hand, obeyed orders instantly and proved himself as reliable a
subordinate as he had been leader. The breeze holding steady, the bateau
made fairly good speed. They might possibly have made better time in a
canoe, but the new mode of travel was a pleasant change from the constant
labor of plying the blades.

Had the lads but known it, their wisest course would have been to cross
directly from the Grand Portage to the southwestern end of Isle Royale
and then skirt the island to its northeast tip. But they had no map to
tell them this. Indeed in those days the position of Isle Royale was but
imperfectly understood. It had been visited by scarcely any white men and
was avoided by the Indians. During the boys’ detention at the Grand
Portage, rain and fog had rendered the island, some eighteen or twenty
miles away, invisible. The day they set sail the sky was blue overhead,
but there was still haze enough on the water to obscure the distance. It
was not strange that they believed Isle Royale farther off than it really
was. From its northeastern end the _Otter_ had sailed to the
Kaministikwia, and Hugh took for granted that the shortest way to reach
the island must be from some point on Thunder Bay. He was aware of the
deep curve made by the shore to form the great bay, and realized that to
follow clear around that curve would be a loss of time. Instead of
turning north to follow the shore, he held on to the northeast, along the
inner side of a long line of narrow, rocky islands and reefs, rising from
the water like the summits of a mountain chain and forming a breakwater
for the protection of the bay.

It was from one of those islands, now called McKellar Island, south about
two miles from the towering heights of the Isle du Paté and at least
fifteen miles by water from the southern mouth of the Kaministikwia, that
the adventurers finally set out for Isle Royale. Before they dared
attempt the perilous sail across the long stretch of the open lake, they
remained in camp a day to let the southwest wind, which had risen to half
a gale, blow itself out. Wind they needed for their venture, but not too
much wind.




                                  XIV
                      SAILING TOWARDS THE SUNRISE


“Truly the spirit of the winds favors us.” Blaise forgot for the moment
his Christian training and spoke in the manner of his Indian forefathers.
He had waked at dawn and, finding the lake merely rippled by a steady
west breeze, had aroused Hugh.

So anxious were the two to take advantage of the perfect weather that
they did not wait for breakfast, but hastily flung their blankets and
cooking utensils into the boat. With the two strong paddles included in
the purchase, they ran the bateau out of the little cove where it had
lain sheltered. Then, hoisting the sail, they steered towards the dawn.

Hugh Beaupré never forgot that sail into the sunrise. Ahead of him the
sky, all rose and gold and faint green blending into soft blue, met the
water without the faintest, thinnest line of land between. Before and
around the boat, the lake shimmered with the reflected tints that
glorified even the patched and dirty sail. Was he bound for the other
side of the world, for some glorious, unearthly realm beyond that
gleaming water? A sense of mingled dread and exultation swept over the
boy, his face flushed, his gray eyes sparkled, his pulse quickened. He
knew the feeling of the explorer setting out for new lands, realms of he
knows not what perils and delights.

The moment of thrill passed, and Hugh turned to glance at Blaise. The
younger boy, his hand on the tiller rope, sat like a statue, his dark
face tense, his shining hazel eyes betraying a kindred feeling to that
which had held Hugh in its thrall. Never before in all their days of
journeying together had the white lad and the half-breed felt such
perfect comradeship. Speech was unnecessary between them.

As the sun rose higher and the day advanced, Blaise was not so sure that
fortune was favoring the venture. The wind sank until the water was
broken by the merest ripple only. There was scarcely enough pressure
against the sail to keep the boat moving.

“At this rate we shall be a week in reaching the island,” said Hugh,
anxiously eying the canvas. “We can go faster with the paddles. Lash the
rudder and we’ll try the blades.”

For the first time since they had changed from canoe to sailboat Blaise
voiced an objection. “To paddle this heavy bateau is hard work,” he said.
“We cannot keep at it all day and all night, as we could in a bark canoe.
As long as the wind blows at all and we move onward, even slowly, we had
best save our strength. Soon we shall need it. Before the sun is
overhead, there will be no wind at all, and then we must paddle.”

Hugh nodded agreement, but, less patient than his half-brother, he found
it trying to sit idle waiting for the gentle breeze to die. Blaise had
prophesied truly. Before noon the sail was hanging loose and idle, the
water, blue under a cloudless sky, was without a wrinkle. It is not often
really hot on the open waters of Lake Superior, but that day the sun
glared down upon the little boat, and the distance shimmered with heat
haze. The bateau had no oars or oarlocks, only two stout paddles, and
paddling the heavy, clumsy boat was slow, hot work.

Pausing for a moment’s rest after an hour’s steady plying of his blade,
Hugh uttered an exclamation. “Look, Blaise,” he cried. “We haven’t so far
to go. There is the Isle Royale ahead, and not far away either.”

He pointed with his blade to the hazy blue masses across the still water.
High the land towered, with points and bays and detached islands.
Encouraged by the sight, the two bent to their paddles.

In a few minutes Hugh cried out again. “How strange the island looks,
Blaise! I don’t remember any flat-topped place like that. See, it looks
as if it had been sliced off with a knife.”

The distant shore had taken on a strange appearance. High towering land
it seemed to be, but curiously level and flattened at the top, like no
land Hugh had seen around Lake Superior.

“There is something wrong,” the boy went on, puzzled. “We must be off our
course. That is not Isle Royale, at least not the part I saw. Where are
we, Blaise? Are we going in the wrong direction? Can that be part of the
mainland?”

“It is not the mainland over that way,” Blaise made prompt reply. “It
must be some part of Minong.” He used the Indian name for the island.

“But I saw nothing the——” Hugh began, then broke off to cry out, “Look,
look, the island is changing before our eyes! It towers up there to the
right, and over there, where it was high a moment ago, it shrinks and
fades away!”

“It is some enchanted land,” the younger boy murmured, gazing in wonder
at the dim blue shapes that loomed in one place, shrank in another,
changed size and form before his awestruck eyes. “It is a land of
spirits.” He ceased his paddling to cross himself.

For a moment Hugh too was inclined to believe that he and his brother
were the victims of witchcraft. But, though not free from superstition,
he had less of it than the half-breed. Moreover he remembered the looming
of the very boat he was now in, when he had first seen it in the mists of
dawn, and also the rock that had looked like an island, when he was on
his way from Michilimackinac. The captain of the ship had told him of
some of the queer visions called mirages he had seen when sailing the
lakes. Turning towards Blaise, Hugh attempted to explain the strange
sight ahead.

“It is the mirage. I have heard of it. The Captain of the _Athabasca_
told me that the mirage is caused by the light shining through mist or
layers of cloud or air that reflect in some way we do not understand,
making images of land appear where there is no land or changing the
appearance of the real land. Sometimes, he said, images of islands are
seen upside down in the sky, above the real water-line. It is all very
strange and no one quite understands why it comes or how, but there is no
enchantment about it, Blaise.”

The younger boy nodded, his eyes still on the changing, hazy shapes
ahead. Without reply, he resumed his paddling. How much he understood of
his elder brother’s explanation, Hugh could not tell. At any rate Blaise
was too proud to show further fear of something Hugh did not seem to be
afraid of.

In silence the two plied their paddles under the hot sun, but the heavy
wooden boat did not respond like a bark canoe to their efforts. Progress
was very slow. White clouds were gathering in the south, moving slowly up
and across the sky, though the water remained quiet. The clouds veiled
the sun. The distant land shrank to a mere blue line, its natural shape
and size, and seemed to come no nearer for all their efforts. Both boys
were growing anxious. After the heat and stillness of the day, the
clouds, slow moving though they were, threatened storm. The two dug their
blades into the water, straining muscles of arms and shoulders to put all
their strength into the stroke.

A crinkle, a ripple was spreading over the green-blue water. A breeze was
coming up from the southwest. Hugh laid down his blade to raise the sail.
In the west the rays of the setting sun were breaking through the clouds
and dyeing them crimson, flame and orange. He was glad to see the sun
again, for it brought him assurance that he was keeping the course, not
swinging too far to north or south.

The breeze, very light at first, strengthened after sunset and became
more westerly, the most favorable direction. The clumsy boat and square
sail could not be made to beat against the wind, but Hugh’s course was a
little north of east. He could sail directly with the wind and yet be
assured of not going far out of his way. The farthest tip of land ahead,
now freed from the false distortions of mirage, he took to be the end of
the long, high shore, where, in the fissure, he and Baptiste had found
the old bateau. That land was still very far away, other islands or
points of the main island lying nearer.

As darkness gathered, the breeze swept away the clouds, and stars and
moon shone out. Sailing over the gently heaving water, where the
moonlight made a shimmering path, was a pleasant change from paddling the
heavy boat in the heat of the day. The boys’ evening meal consisted of a
few handfuls of hulled corn and some maple sugar, with the clear, cold
lake water for drink. Both Blaise at the tiller and Hugh handling the
sheet found it difficult to keep awake. The day had been a long one, but
they must remain alert to hold their course and avoid disaster.

They were approaching land now. In the moonlight, to avoid islands and
projecting rocks was not difficult. Sunken reefs were harder to discern.
Only the breaking of waves upon the rocks that rose near to the surface
betrayed the danger. So the steersman shunned points and the ends of
islands from which hidden reefs might run out. Hugh would have been glad
to camp on the first land reached, but he knew he ought to take advantage
of the favorable wind and get as near as possible to the spot where the
wreck lay. Shaking off his drowsiness, he gave his whole attention to
navigation.

Several islands and a number of points, that might belong either to the
great island or to smaller bordering ones, were passed before reaching a
low shore, well wooded, which Hugh felt sure he recognized. He remembered
that the _Otter_ had been obliged to go far out around the tip to avoid a
long reef. He warned Blaise to steer well out, but the latter did not go
quite far enough and the boat grazed a rock. No damage was done, however.
The bateau was now headed for a strip of much higher land, showing dark
between sky and water. Hugh thought that must be the towering,
tree-crowned, rock shore he recalled. To land there tonight was out of
the question. The moon had gone down, and to run, in the darkness, up the
bay to the spot where the _Otter_ had taken shelter might also prove
difficult. Hugh decided they had better tie up somewhere on the point
they had just rounded. He lowered the sail and both boys took up their
paddles. For some distance they skirted the steep, slanting rock shore
where the trees grew down as far as they could cling.

One mountain ash had lost its footing and fallen into the lake. To the
fallen tree Hugh tied the boat, in still water and under the shadow of
the shore. Then he and Blaise rolled themselves in their blankets and lay
down in the bottom. Heedless of the dew-wet planking they were asleep
immediately. The water rippled gently against the rough sides of the
boat, an owl in a spruce sent forth its eerie hoots, from across the
water a loon answered with a wild, mocking cry, but the tired lads slept
on undisturbed.




                                   XV
                          THE RIFT IN THE ROCK


The brothers were in the habit of waking early, but it had been nearly
dawn when they lay down, and, in the shadow of the trees, they slept
until the sun was well started on his day’s journey. When they did wake,
Hugh’s first glance was towards the land across the water.

There was no mistaking that high towering shore, steep rocks at the base,
richly forest clad above. It was the same shore he had seen weeks before,
the first time dimly through fog and snow, again clear cut and distinct,
when he and Baptiste had rowed Captain Bennett out of the bay, and yet a
third time from the deck of the _Otter_ as she sailed away towards
Thunder Cape.

“We have come aright, Blaise,” said Hugh with satisfaction. “That is the
place we seek, and it can’t be more than a mile away. Do you see that
spot where the trees come to the water, that tiny break in the rocks? It
is a little cove with a bit of beach, and in that stretch of rocks to the
left is the crack where the old boat lies. I’m sure of the spot, because
from the _Otter_, when we were leaving, I noticed the bare rock pillars
of that highest ridge away up there, like the wall of a fort among the
trees. It doesn’t show quite so plainly now the birches are in leaf, but
I’m sure it is the same. There are two little coves almost directly below
that pillared rock wall, and the cliff is a little farther to the left.
Oh, but I am hungry,” he added. “We must have a good breakfast before we
start across.”

Over the short stretch of water that separated the low point from the
high shore, the bateau sailed before the brisk wind. The stretch of gray,
pillared rock, like the wall of a fortress, high up among the greenery,
served as a guide. As the boat drew nearer, the twin coves, shallow
depressions in the shore line separated by a projecting mass of rock,
came clear to view.

“Steer for the cliff just beyond the left hand cove,” Hugh ordered.
“We’ll run in close and then turn.”

Blaise obediently steered straight for the mass of rock with the vertical
fissures, as if his purpose were to dash the boat against the cliff. As
they drew close, Hugh gave a shout.

The crack had come into view, a black rift running at an angle into the
cliff. As the boat swung about to avoid going on the rocks, the younger
boy’s quick eye caught a glimpse, in that dark fissure, of the end of a
bateau. To give him that glimpse, Hugh had taken a chance of wrecking
their own boat. Now he was obliged to act quickly, lowering the sail and
seizing a paddle.

In the trough of the waves, they skirted, close in, the steep, rugged
rocks. Almost hidden by a short point was the bit of beach at the end of
the first of the twin coves. With a dexterous twist of the paddles, the
boys turned their boat and ran up on the beach. Landing with so much
force would have ground the bottom out of a birch canoe, but the heavy
planks of the bateau would stand far worse battering.

The appearance of the cove had changed greatly since that day when Hugh
and Baptiste had rowed past. Then the bushes, birches and mountain ash
trees that ringed the pebbles had been bare limbed. Now, with June more
than two-thirds gone, they were all in full leaf. Big clusters of buds
among the graceful foliage of the mountain ashes were almost ready to
open into handsome flowers. The high-bush cranberries bore white blossoms
here and there, and the ninebark bushes were covered with masses of
pinkish buds. Though Hugh’s mind was on the wreck, his eyes took note of
the almost incredible difference a few weeks had made. His nose sniffed
with appreciation the spicy smell of the fresh, growing tips of the
balsams, mingled with the heliotrope-like odor of the tiny twin-flowers
blooming in the woods. He did not let enjoyment of these things delay
him, however.

“Now,” he cried, when he and Blaise had pulled up the boat, “we must get
into that crack. We can’t reach it from the water in this wind. Perhaps
we can climb down from the top.”

Up a steep rock slope, dotted with fresh green moss, shiny leaved
bearberry, spreading masses of juniper and a few evergreen trees growing
in the depressions, he hastened with Blaise close behind. Along the top
of the cliff they made their way until they reached the rift. Though the
sides of the crack were almost vertical, trees and bushes grew wherever
they could anchor a root. Through branches and foliage, the boys could
get no view of the old boat at the bottom.

“We must climb down,” said Hugh.

“It will be difficult,” Blaise replied doubtfully. “To do it we must
cling to the roots and branches. Those trees have little soil to grow in.
Our weight may pull them over.”

“We must get down some way,” Hugh insisted. “We shall have to take our
chances.”

“The wind and waves will calm. We have but to wait and enter from the
water.”

Hugh had not the Indian patience. “The wind is not going down, it is
coming up,” he protested. “It may blow for a week. I didn’t come here to
wait for calm weather. I’m going down some way.”

He wriggled between the lower branches of a spruce growing on the very
verge of the crack and let himself down a vertical wall, feeling with his
toes for a support. Carefully he rested his weight on the slanting stem
of a stunted cedar growing in a niche. It held him. Clinging with fingers
and moccasined feet to every projection of rock and each branch, stem or
root that promised to hold him, he worked his way down. He heeded his
younger brother’s warning in so far as to test every support before
trusting himself to it. But in spite of his care, a bit of projecting
rock crumbled under his feet. His weight was thrown upon a root he had
laid hold of. The root seemed to be firmly anchored, but it pulled loose,
and Hugh went sliding down right into the old boat. The ice, which had
filled the wreck when he first saw it, had melted. The bateau was more
than half full of water, into which he plumped, splashing it all over
him. He was not hurt, however, only wet and shaken up a bit.

Blaise had already begun to follow his elder brother into the cleft, when
he heard Hugh crash down. Halfway over the edge, the younger boy paused
for a moment. Then Hugh’s shout came up to him. “All right, but be
careful,” the elder brother cautioned.

Light and very agile, the younger lad had better luck, landing nimbly on
his feet on the cross plank of the old boat. It was the vermilion painted
thwart that had held the mast. Eagerly both lads bent over it to make
out, in the dim light, the black figures on the red ground.

“It is our father’s sign,” Blaise said quietly, “our father’s sign, just
as I have seen it many times. This was his bateau, but whether it was
wrecked here or elsewhere we cannot tell.”

“I believe it was wrecked here,” Hugh asserted. “See how the end is
splintered. This boat was driven upon these very rocks where it now lies,
the prow smashed and rents ripped in the bottom and one side. But it is
empty. We must seek some sign to guide us to the furs. We need more
light.”

“I will make a torch. Wait but a moment.”

Blaise straightened up, hooked his fingers over the edge of a narrow,
rock shelf, swung himself up, and ascended the rest of the way as nimbly
as a squirrel. In a few minutes he came scrambling down again, holding in
one hand a roughly made torch, resinous twigs bound together with a bit
of bearberry vine. With sparks from his flint and steel, he lighted the
balsam torch. It did not give a very bright light, but it enabled the
boys to examine the old bateau closely. The only mark they could find
that might have been intended as a guide was a groove across the fore
thwart. At one end of the groove short lines had been cut diagonally to
form an arrow point.

“The cache, if it is on the island, must be sought that way,” said
Blaise.

“The arrow surely points up the crack. We’ll follow it.”

The smashed bow of the boat was firmly lodged among the fragments of rock
upon which it had been driven. Over those fragments, up a steep slope,
the boys picked their way for a few yards, until the walls drew together,
the fissure narrowing to a mere slit. By throwing the light of the torch
into the slit and reaching in arm’s length, Hugh satisfied himself that
there were no furs there. Nevertheless the arrow pointed in that
direction. He looked about him. The left hand wall was almost
perpendicular, solid rock apparently, with only an occasional vertical
crack or shallow niche where some hardy bit of greenery clung. But from
the right wall several blocks had fallen out. On one of those blocks Hugh
was standing. He held the torch up at arm’s length.

“There’s a hole up there. Such a place would make a good cache.”

“Let me up on your shoulders,” Blaise proposed, “and I will look in.”

Sitting on Hugh’s shoulders, Blaise threw the light of the torch into the
hole. Then he reached in his arm. “There are no furs here,” he said.

Hugh had been almost certain he had found the cache. He was keenly
disappointed. “Are you sure?” he cried.

“Yes. It is a small place, just a hole in the rock. Let me down.”

“There are no furs there,” Blaise repeated, when he had jumped down from
Hugh’s shoulders. “But something I found.” He held out a short piece of
rawhide cord.

Hugh stared at the cord, then at his half-brother. “You were not the
first to visit that hole then. What is the meaning of this?” He took the
bit of rawhide in his fingers.

“I think it means that the furs have been there, but have been taken
away,” was the younger lad’s slow reply. “It is a piece from the thong
that bound a bale of furs. That is what I think.”

“Someone has found the cache and taken away the pelts.”

“I fear it,” agreed Blaise. Though he spoke quietly, his disappointment
was as strong as Hugh’s.

“That someone is probably one of the Old Company’s men. Then the furs are
lost to us indeed. Yet we do not know. How did anyone learn of the cache?
It may have been Black Thunder of course, but then what was the meaning
of the blood-stained shirt? No, we don’t know, Blaise. Our furs may be
gone for good, but we can’t be sure. Father may have put them in there
out of reach of the storm and later moved them to some other place, or
they may never have been in that hole at all. Some animal may have
carried that bit of rawhide there.”

Blaise shook his head. “What animal could go up there?”

“A squirrel perhaps, or a bird, a gull. Anyway we can’t give up the
search yet, just because we have found a bit of rawhide in a hole in the
rocks. That would be folly. Perhaps the arrow points up the rift to some
spot above. We can’t climb up here. We must go back.”

The two returned to the wreck and climbed up the way they had come down.
Hugh again in the lead, they followed along the top of the rift to its
head. There they sought earnestly for some sign that might lead them to
the cache, but found none. When at sunset they gave up the search for
that day, their fear that the furs had been stolen from the hole in the
rock had grown near to a certainty. Well-nigh discouraged, they went back
to the beach in the shallow cove where they had left their boat.

“Why is it, Blaise,” Hugh asked, as they sat by the fire waiting for the
kettle to boil, “that no Indians dwell on this big island? It is a
beautiful place and there must be game and furs for the hunting.”

Blaise gave his characteristic French shrug. “I know not if there is much
game, and Minong is far from the mainland. I have heard that there is
great store of copper in the rocks. The Ojibwas say that the island was
made by the giant Kepoochikan. Once upon a time the fish quarrelled with
Kepoochikan and tried to drown him by making a great flood. But he built
a big floating island and made it rich with copper and there he took his
family and all the kinds of birds and beasts there are. When the water,
which had spread over the whole earth, stopped rising, he told a gull to
dive down to the bottom and bring up some mud. The gull could not dive so
far, but drowned before he reached the bottom. Then Kepoochikan sent a
beaver. The beaver came up almost drowned, but with a ball of mud
clutched tight in his hands. Kepoochikan took the mud and made a new
earth, but he kept the island Minong for his home. After many years there
was another giant, the great Nanibozho, who was chief of all the Indians
on the new land Kepoochikan had made. Nanibozho is a good manito and
Kepoochikan a bad one. They went to war, and Nanibozho threw a great
boulder from the mainland across at Kepoochikan and conquered him. The
boulder is here on Minong yet they say. Since then Nanibozho has guarded
the copper of Minong, though some say his real dwelling place is on
Thunder Cape. Off the shore and in the channels of Minong he has set
sharp rocks to destroy the canoes that approach the island, and he has
many spirits to help him guard the treasure.”

“That is only a tale, of course,” said Hugh somewhat disdainfully. “We of
the ship _Otter_ camped here several days and we saw or heard no spirits.
We found nothing to fear.”

“You sought no copper,” was the retort. “It is said that sometimes
Kepoochikan and Nanibozho fight together on the rocks and hurl great
boulders about. Strange tales there are too of the thick forest, of the
little lakes and bays. There is one place called the Bay of Manitos,
where, so I have heard, dwell giant Windigos and great serpents and huge
birds and spirits that mock the lonely traveller with shouts and threats
and laughter.”

“Surely you do not believe such tales, Blaise,” Hugh protested, “or fear
such spirits.”

“I know that neither Kepoochikan nor Nanibozho made the world,” the
younger boy replied seriously. “My father and the priests taught me that
the good God made the world. But whether the tales of giants and spirits
are true, I know not. That I do not fear them I have proved by coming
here with you.”

To that remark Hugh had no answer. To believe or be inclined to believe
such tales and yet to come to the enchanted island, to come with only one
companion, surely proved his half-brother’s courage. Indeed the older boy
had no thought of questioning the younger’s bravery. He had come to know
Blaise too well.




                                  XVI
                               THE CACHE


The night being clear, the boys did not trouble to prepare a shelter.
They merely cut some balsam branches and spread them smoothly on the
beach. Strange to say, the more superstitious half-breed lad fell asleep
immediately, while the white boy, who had scorned the notion of giants
and manitos, found sleep long in coming. That night seemed to him the
loneliest he had ever spent. Camp, on the trip down and up the main
shore, had, to be sure, usually been made far from the camps of other
men. But there _were_ men, both red and white, on that shore. When the
lake was not too rough, there was always the chance that the sound of
human voices and the dip of paddles might be heard at any time during the
night, as a canoe passed in the starlight.

Here, however, the whole length and breadth of the great island,—which
the two lads believed even larger than it really is, some fifty miles in
length and twelve or fourteen broad at its widest part,—there lived, so
far as they knew, not one human being. Never before had Hugh felt so
utterly lonely, such a small, insignificant human creature in an unknown
and unfeeling wilderness of woods, waters and rocks. The island was far
more beautiful and hospitable now than it had appeared when he visited it
before, but then, almost uncannily lonely and remote though the place had
seemed, he had had the companionship of Baptiste and Captain Bennett and
the rest of the ship’s crew.

Yet what was there to fear? It was not likely that Isle Royale contained
any especially fierce beasts. There were wolves and lynxes, but they were
skulking, cowardly creatures, and, in the summer at least, must find
plentiful prey of rabbits and other small animals. Moose too there were
and perhaps bears, but both were harmless unless attacked and cornered.
It was not the thought of any animal enemy that caused Hugh’s uneasiness,
as he lay listening to the night sounds. His feeling was rather of
apprehension, of dread of some unknown evil that threatened his comrade
and himself. He tried to shake off the unreasonable dread, but everything
about him seemed to serve to intensify the feeling, the low, continuous
murmur of the waves on the rocks, the swishing rustle of the wind in the
trees, the long-drawn, eerie cries of two loons answering one another
somewhere up the bay, the lonely “hoot-ti-toot” of an owl. Once from the
wooded ridges above him, there came with startling clearness the shrill
screech of a lynx. But all these sounds were natural ones, heard many
times during his adventurous journey. Why, tonight, did they seem to hold
some new and fearful menace?

Disgusted with himself, he resolved to conquer the unreasonable dread.
Will power alone could not triumph over his unrest, but physical
weariness won at last and he fell asleep. A brief shower, from the edge
of a passing storm-cloud, aroused him once, but the rain did not last
long enough to wet his blanket, and he was off to sleep again in a few
minutes.

Hugh woke with a start. Dawn had come, but the little cove was shrouded
in white mist. Beside him on the balsam bed, Blaise was sitting upright,
his body rigid, his bronze face tense. He was listening intently. Hugh
freed his arms from his blanket and raised himself on his elbow. Blaise
turned his head.

“You heard it?” he whispered.

“Something waked me. What was it?”

“A gun shot.”

“Impossible!”

“I heard it clearly. I had just waked.”

“Near by?”

“Not very far away. Up there somewhere.”

Blaise pointed to the now invisible woods above the sheer cliff that
formed the central shore of the cove between the beaches. “It is hard to
be quite sure of the direction in this fog, and there was only one shot.”

For some minutes the two lads sat still, listening, but the sound was not
repeated. It seemed incredible that any human being should be so near on
the big island where neither white men nor Indians were ever known to
come intentionally. Hugh was inclined to think Blaise mistaken. The
younger boy had certainly heard some sharp sound, but Hugh could scarcely
believe it was the report of a gun.

However, the mere suspicion that any other man might be near by was
enough to make the boys proceed with the greatest caution. Veiled by the
fog,—which had been caused by the warm shower falling on the lake during
the night,—they could be seen only by someone very near at hand, but
there were other ways in which they might be betrayed. The sound of their
voices or movements, the smell of the smoke from their cooking fire might
reveal their presence. The secret nature of their quest made them anxious
that their visit to the island should not become known. So they lighted
no fire, breakfasting on the cold remains of last night’s corn porridge
sprinkled with maple sugar. They talked little and in whispers, and took
care to make the least possible noise.

Having decided to give at least one more day to the search for the furs,
the lads climbed the steep slope and made their way to the head of the
fissure. Up there the fog was much less thick than down in the cove. The
crack in the rock had narrowed to a mere slit almost choked with tree
roots upon which fallen leaves and litter had lodged. Near the edge, in a
depression where there was a little soil, stood a clump of birch sprouts
growing up about the stump of an old broken tree. In their search for
some blaze or mark that might guide them, the two thought they had
examined every tree in the vicinity.

That morning, as he was about to pass the clump of birches, Hugh happened
to notice what a rapid growth the sprouts had made that season. The sight
of the new growth suggested something to him. He began to pull apart and
bend back the little trees to get a better view of the old stump. There,
concealed by the young growth, was the mark he sought. A piece of the
ragged, gray, lichen-scarred bark had been sliced away, and on the bare,
crumbly wood had been cut a transverse groove with an arrow point.

Hugh promptly summoned Blaise. The cut in the old stump seemed to prove
that the furs might not, after all, have been stolen from the hole in the
rocks. The arrow pointed directly along the overgrown crack, which the
lads traced for fifty or sixty feet farther, when it came abruptly to an
end. They had come to a hollow or gully. The crack showed distinctly in
the steep rock wall, but the bottom of the hollow and the opposite
gradual slope were deep with soil and thick with growth. The rift, which
widened at the outer end into a cleft, ran, it was apparent, clear
through the rock ridge that formed the shore cliff. The searchers had now
reached the lower ground behind that ridge. Which way should they turn
next?

That question was answered promptly. The abrupt face of the rock wall was
well overgrown with green moss and green-gray lichens. In one place the
short, thick growth had been scratched away to expose a strip of the gray
stone about an inch wide and six or seven inches long. The clean-cut
appearance of the scratch seemed to prove that it had been made with a
knife or some other sharp instrument. So slowly do moss and lichens
spread on a rock surface that such a mark would remain clear and distinct
for one season at least, probably for several years. There was no arrow
point here, but the scratch was to the left of the crack. The boys turned
unhesitatingly in that direction.

The growth in this low place was dense. They had to push their way among
old, ragged birches and close standing balsams draped with gray beards of
lichen which were sapping the trees’ life-blood. Everywhere, on the steep
rock wall, on each tree trunk, they sought for another sign. For several
hundred yards they found nothing, until they came to a cross gully
running back towards the lake. In the very entrance stood a small, broken
birch. The slender stem was not completely severed, the top of the tree
resting on the ground.

“There is our sign,” said Blaise as soon as he caught sight of the birch.

“It is only a broken tree,” Hugh protested. “I see nothing to show that
it is a sign.”

“But I see something,” Blaise answered promptly. “First, there is the
position, right here where we need guidance. The tree has been broken so
that it points down that ravine. The break is not old, not weathered
enough to have happened before last winter. Yet it happened before the
leaves came out. They were still in the bud. It was in late winter or
early spring that tree was broken.”

“Just about the time father must have been on the island,” Hugh
commented.

Blaise went on with his explanation. “What broke the tree? The wind?
Sound birches are not easily broken by wind. They sway, they bend,
sometimes they are tipped over at the roots. But the stem itself is not
broken unless it is rotten or the storm violent. Here are no signs of
strong wind. There are no other broken trees near this one.”

“That is true,” murmured Hugh looking about him.

“Now we will look at the break,” Blaise continued confidently. “See, the
trunk is sound, but it has been cut with an axe, cut deep and bent down.
And here, look here!” His usually calm voice was thrilling with
excitement. He was pointing to some small cuts in the white bark just
below the break.

“J. B., father’s initials!” cried Hugh.

Blaise laid his finger on his lips to remind his companion that caution
must still be observed. They had heard no further sound and had seen no
sign of a human being, but the half-breed lad had not forgotten the sharp
report that had so startled him in the dawn. It was best to move silently
and speak with lowered voice.

Blaise led the way down the narrow cross gully, so narrow that where a
tree grew,—and trees seemed to grow everywhere on this wild island where
they could push down a root,—there was scarcely room to get by. After a
few hundred yards of such going, the ravine began to widen. The walls
became higher and so sheer that nothing could cling to them but moss,
lichens and sturdy crevice plants. Under foot there was no longer any
soil, only pebbles and broken rock fragments. Ahead, beyond the deep
shadow of the cleft, lay sunlit water. This was evidently another of the
fissures that ran down through the outer rock ridge to the water,
fissures that were characteristic of that stretch of shore.

“We are coming back to the lake through another crack much like the one
where the old boat lies,” said Hugh. “We must be off the trail somewhere.
There is no place here to hide furs.”

Blaise, who was still ahead, did not answer. He was closely scanning the
rock wall on either side. A moment later, he paused and gave a little
grunt of interest or satisfaction.

“What is it?” Hugh asked.

Blaise took another step forward, and pointed to the right hand wall. A
narrow fissure extended from top to bottom. So narrow was the crack that
Hugh rather doubted whether he could squeeze into it.

“I will go first, I am smaller,” Blaise suggested. “If I cannot go
through, we shall know that no man has been in there.”

Slender and lithe, Blaise found that he could wriggle his way through
without much difficulty. The heavier, broader-shouldered Hugh found the
task less easy. He had to go sidewise and for a moment he thought he
should stick fast, but he managed to squeeze past the narrowest spot, to
find himself in an almost round hollow. This hole or pit in the outer
ridge was perhaps twenty feet in diameter with abrupt rock walls and a
floor of boulders and pebbles, among which grew a few hardy shrubs. It
was open to the sky and ringed at the top with shrubby growth. Hugh
glanced about him with a keen sense of disappointment. Surely the furs
were not in this place.

Blaise, on the other side of a scraggly ninebark bush, seemed to be
examining a pile of boulders and rock fragments. The older boy rounded
the bush, and disappointment gave way to excitement. By what agency had
those stones been heaped in that particular spot? They had not fallen
from the wall beyond. The pit had no opening through which waves could
wash. Had that heap been put together by the hand of man? Was it indeed a
cache?

Without a word spoken, the two lads set about demolishing the stone pile.
One after another they lifted each stone and threw it aside. As he rolled
away one of the larger boulders, Hugh could not restrain a little cry. A
bit of withered cedar had come to light. With eager energy he flung away
the remaining stones. There lay revealed a heap of something covered with
cedar branches, the flat sprays, withered but still aromatic, woven
together closely to form a tight and waterproof covering. Over and around
them, the stones had been heaped to conceal every sprig.

With flying fingers, the boys pulled the sprays apart. There were the
bales of furs each in a skin wrapper. The brothers had found the hidden
cache and their inheritance. Both lads were surprised at the number of
the bales. If the pelts were of good quality, no mean sum would be
realized by their sale. They would well repay in gold for all the long
search. Yet, to do the boys justice, neither was thinking just then of
the worth of the pelts. Their feeling was rather of satisfaction that
they were really carrying out their father’s last command. The long and
difficult search was over, and they had not failed in it.

They lifted the packages from a platform of poles resting on stones. The
whole cache had been cleverly constructed. No animal could tear apart the
bales, and, even in the severest storm, no water could reach them. Over
them the branches had formed a roof strong enough to keep the top stones
from pressing too heavily upon the furs.

“But where is the packet?” cried Hugh. “It must be inside one of the
bales, but which one I wonder.”

“I think it is this one,” Blaise replied.

The package he was examining seemed to be just like the others, except
that into the rawhide thong that bound it had been twisted a bit of
scarlet wool ravelled from a cap or sash. Blaise would have untied the
thong, but the impatient Hugh cut it, and stripped off the wrapping. The
bale contained otter skins of fine quality. Between two of the pelts was
a small, flat packet. It was tied with a bit of cedar cord and sealed
with a blotch of pitch into which had been pressed the seal of the ring
Hugh now wore.

“Shall we open this here and now, Blaise?” Hugh asked.

“That is for you to say, my brother. You are the elder.”

“Then I think we had best open it at once.”

Hugh broke the seal and was about to untie the cord, when from somewhere
above the rim of the pit, there rang out a loud, long-drawn call,
“Oh-eye-ee, oh-eye-ee-e.” It was not the cry of an animal. It was a human
voice.




                                  XVII
                           THE SEALED PACKET


Hastily Hugh thrust the unopened packet into the breast of his deerskin
tunic, and looked up apprehensively at the border of green about the rim
of the pit. The man who had shouted could not be far away. There might be
others even nearer. If anyone should push through that protecting fringe
of growth, he would be looking directly down on the two lads. The bales
would be in plain view.

Hugh thought quickly. “We must conceal the furs again, Blaise,” he
whispered, “until we can find some way to get them to the boat.”

Blaise nodded. “We will take them away at night.”

Rapidly and with many an apprehensive glance upward, the two replaced the
bales on the platform of poles, covered the heap with the cedar boughs
and built up the stones around and over the whole. They were in too great
haste to do as careful a piece of work as Jean Beaupré had done. Their
rock pile would scarcely have stood close scrutiny without betraying
something suspicious. From above, however, its appearance was innocent
enough, and no chance comer would be likely to descend into the hole.

Squeezing through the narrow slit, the brothers examined the cleft that
ran down in a steep incline of rock fragments to the water. The simplest
plan would be to bring the boat in there. With strangers likely to appear
at any moment, it would be best to wait until nightfall. The two decided
to return to the cove where they had camped, and wait for darkness.

Back through the fissure and over the low ground behind the shore ridge,
they made their way cautiously, silently. They went slowly, taking pains
to efface any noticeable tracks or signs of their passage, and watching
and listening alertly for any sight or sound of human beings. A rustling
in the bushes caused both to stand motionless until they caught sight of
the cause, a little, bright-eyed squirrel or a gray-brown snowshoe rabbit
with long ears and big hind feet. Both boys would have liked that fresh
meat for the dinner pot, but they had no wish to attract attention by a
shot.

When they reached the top of the cliff, they found that the fog had
entirely disappeared, driven away by a light breeze. As they went down
the steep, open slope to the little beach, they knew themselves to be
exposed to the view of anyone who might happen to be looking out from the
woods bordering the cove. Anxiously they scanned woods, rocks and lake,
but saw no sign of any human being. Not a living creature but a fish duck
peacefully riding the water was to be seen. The boat and supplies were
undisturbed.

The boys stayed quietly in the cove during the remaining hours of
daylight. The beach was partially hidden from the water by the end of the
shore ridge, and screened on the land side by the dense growth of trees
and bushes bordering the pebbles. Beyond the beach was a vertical rock
cliff sheer to the water from its forested summit. Then came another
short stretch of pebbles bounded by a low rock wall and protected by the
jutting mass of rock, only scantily wooded, that formed the dividing line
between the twin coves. To anyone standing over there or among the trees
at the edge of the high central cliff, the boys and their boat would have
been in plain sight. The shot Blaise had heard in the early dawn had come
from somewhere above that cliff, but it was not likely that the man who
had fired that shot was still there. Doubtless he had been hunting. At
any rate the lads had no better place to wait for darkness to come. They
were at least far enough from the pit so their discovery by wandering
Indians or white hunters need not lead to the finding of the furs. As the
day wore on, the brothers cast many an anxious glance around the shores
of the cove. They were startled whenever a squirrel chattered, a
woodpecker tapped loudly on a branch, or two tree trunks rubbed against
one another, swayed by a stronger gust of wind.

As their food was ill adapted to being eaten raw, they permitted
themselves a small cooking fire, taking care to use only thoroughly dry
wood and to keep a clear flame with as little smoke as possible. After
the kettle had been swung over the fire, Hugh drew from his breast the
packet and examined the outside carefully. The wrapping was of oiled
fish-skin tied securely.

“Shall we open it, Blaise?” he asked again.

The younger boy cast a quick glance about him, at the rock slope they had
descended, the dense bushes beyond the pebbles, the forest rim along the
summit of the high central cliff, the rough, wave-eaten rock mass across
the cove. Then his eyes returned to his companion’s face and he nodded
silently.

Curious though he was, Hugh was deliberate in opening the mysterious
packet. He untied the cord and removed the outer cover carefully not to
tear it. Within the oiled skin wrapper was still another of the finest,
whitest, softest doeskin, tied with the same sort of bark cord. The cord
had been passed through holes in a square of paper-thin birch bark. On
the bark label was written in the same faint, muddy brown ink Blaise had
used:

  “To be delivered to M. René Dubois,
                               At Montreal.
  Of great importance.”


Hugh turned over the packet. It was sealed, like the outer wrapper, with
drops of pitch upon which Jean Beaupré’s seal had been pressed. For
several minutes the boy sat considering what he ought to do. Then he
looked up at his half-brother’s equally grave face.

“I don’t like to open this,” Hugh said. “It is addressed to M. René
Dubois of Montreal and it is sealed. I think father intended me to take
it to Monsieur Dubois with the seals unbroken. Doubtless he will open it
in my presence and tell me what it contains.”

Blaise nodded understandingly. He had lived long enough in civilization
to realize the seriousness of breaking the seals of a packet addressed to
someone else. “That Monsieur Dubois, do you know him?” he inquired.

“No, I didn’t know my father had any friends in Montreal. He never lived
there, you know. His old home was in Quebec, where I was born. I don’t
remember that I ever heard of Monsieur René Dubois, but my relatives in
Montreal may know him. Probably I can find him. If I can’t, then I think
it would be right to open this packet, but not until I have tried. Shall
I take charge of this, Blaise?”

“You are the elder and our father said you must take the packet to
Montreal.”

To the impatient Hugh the wait until the sun descended beyond the woods
of the low point across the water seemed long indeed. He found it hard to
realize that only two nights before he and Blaise had reached the point
and had tied up there. They had surely been lucky to find the cache of
furs so soon.

Not until the shadows of the shore lay deep upon the water did the lads
push off the bateau. They paddled silently out of the little cove and
close under the abrupt, riven rocks, taking care not to let a blade
splash as it dipped and was withdrawn. The water was rippled by the
lightest of breezes, and the moon was bright. The deep cleft where Jean
Beaupré’s wrecked boat lay was in black darkness, though. Hugh could not
even make out the stern. His mind was busy with thoughts of the father he
had known so slightly, with speculations about his coming to the island,
about the way he had left it. Through what treachery had he received his
death blow?

Another rift in the rock was passed before the boys reached a wider,
shallower cleft they felt sure was the one leading to the cache.
Cautiously they turned into the dark mouth of the fissure and grounded
the boat on the pebbles, water-worn and rounded here where the waves
reached them. Overhead the moonlight filtered down among the thick sprays
of the stunted cedars that grew along the rim and even down into the
crack. But the darkness at the bottom was so deep the brothers could
proceed only by feeling their way with both hands and feet. In this
manner they went up over pebbles and angular rock fragments to the narrow
slit in the wall, and squeezed through in pitch blackness to the circular
hollow.

There was moonlight in the pit, but the cache, close under the rock wall,
was in the shadow. So difficult did the boys find it to remove the stones
in the darkness, that they decided to risk lighting a torch. During the
afternoon Blaise had made a couple of torches of spruce and balsam. He
lighted one now and stuck it in a cranny of the rock just above the heap
of stones. By the feeble, flickering and smoky light, the cache was
uncovered. Pushing and hauling the bales through the narrow crack was
difficult and troublesome. The larger ones would not go through, and had
to be unwrapped and reduced to smaller parcels. Even by the dim light of
the torch, the boys could see that the furs were of excellent quality.
Before loading, the bateau had to be pushed out a little way, Blaise
standing in the water to hold it while Hugh piled in the bales. Then both
climbed in and paddled quietly out of the crack.

There was not breeze enough for sailing. Hugh and Blaise were anxious to
get away from the spot where they had found the furs and had heard the
shout, but paddling the heavily laden bateau was slow work. Without a
breeze to fill the sail, they were loth to start across the open lake, so
they kept on along shore to the northeast. When they had put a mile or
more between themselves and the place where they had found the furs, they
would camp and wait for sunrise and a breeze.

Slowly and laboriously they paddled on, close to the high shore. The
calm, moonlit water stretched away on their left. The dark,
forest-crowned rocks, huge, worn and seamed pillars, towered forbiddingly
on the other side. At last the wider view of the water ahead and the
barrenness of the tumbled rocks to the right indicated that they were
reaching the end of the shore along which they had been travelling.

“We’ll land now,” said Hugh, “as soon as we can find a place.”

The abrupt, truncated pillars of rock were not so high here, but were
bordered at the water’s edge with broken blocks and great boulders,
affording little chance of a landing place. By paddling close in,
however, slowly and cautiously to avoid disaster, the boys discovered a
niche between two blocks of rock, with water deep enough to permit
running the boat in. There they climbed out on the rock and secured the
bateau by a couple of turns of the rope around a smaller block. In rough
weather such a landing would have been impossible, but on this still
night there was no danger of the bateau bumping upon the rocks. Farther
along Blaise found a spot where the solid rock shelved down gradually.
Rolling themselves in their blankets, the brothers stretched out on the
hard bed.

The plaintive crying of gulls waked Hugh just as the sun was coming up
from the water, a great red ball in the morning mist. “I don’t like this
place,” he said as he sat up. “We can be seen plainly from the lake.”

“Yes,” Blaise agreed, “but we can see far across the lake. If a boat
comes, we shall see it while it is yet a long way off. I think we need
not fear anything from that direction. No, the only way an enemy can draw
near unseen is from the land, from the woods farther back there.”

“The water is absolutely still,” Hugh went on. “There isn’t a capful of
wind to fill our sail, and we can’t paddle this loaded boat clear across
to the mainland. We must find a better place than this, though, to wait
for a breeze. I am going to look around a bit.”

The lads soon found that they were near the end of a point, a worn,
wave-eaten, rock point, bare except for a few scraggly bushes, clumps of
dwarfed white cedar and such mosses and lichens as could cling to the
surface. Farther back were woods, mostly evergreen. The two felt that
they must find a spot where they could wait for a wind without being
visible from the woods. Yet they wanted to remain where they could watch
the weather and get away at the first opportunity. At the very tip of the
point, the slate-gray rocks were abrupt, slightly overhanging indeed, but
in one spot there lay exposed at the base a few feet of low, shelving,
wave-smoothed shore, which must be under water in rough weather. On this
calm day the lower rock shore was dry. There, in the shelter of the
overhanging masses, the boys would be entirely concealed from the land
side. A little farther along on the end of the point, rose an abrupt,
rounded tower of rock. Between the rock tower and the place they had
selected for themselves was a narrow inlet where the bateau would be
fairly well hidden. They shoved the boat out from between the boulders,
where it had lain safe while they slept, and paddled around to the little
inlet. On the wave-smoothed, low rock shore, they kindled a tiny fire of
dry sticks gathered at the edge of the woods, and hung the kettle from a
pole slanted over the flames from a cranny in the steep rock at the rear.

The wind did not come up as the sun rose higher, as the lads had hoped it
would. The delay was trying, especially to the impetuous Hugh. They had
found the cache, secured the furs and the packet, and had got safely away
with them, only to be stuck here on the end of this point for hours of
idle waiting. Yet even Hugh did not want to start across the lake under
the present conditions. Paddling the bateau had been laborious enough
when it was empty, but now, laden almost to the water-line, the boat was
far worse to handle. Propelling it was not merely hard work, but progress
would be so slow that the journey across to the mainland would be a long
one, with always the chance that the wind, when it did come, might blow
from the wrong quarter. The bateau would not sail against the wind. To
attempt to paddle it against wind and waves would invite disaster.
Sailing the clumsy craft, heavy laden as it was, across the open water
with a fair wind would be quite perilous enough. There was nothing to do
but wait, and this seemed as good a place in which to wait as any they
were likely to find.




                                 XVIII
                           THE FLEEING CANOE


As the morning advanced, the sun grew hot, beating down on the water and
radiating heat from the rocks. Scarcely a ripple wrinkled the blue
surface of the lake, and the distance was hazy and shimmering. An island
with steep, straight sides, four or five miles northeast of the point,
was plainly visible, but Thunder Cape to the west was so dim it could
barely be discerned. The day was much like the one on which the lads had
come across from the mainland.

Hugh grew more and more restless. Several times he climbed the only
climbable place on the overhanging rock and peeped between the branches
of a dwarfed cedar bush. He could see across to the edge of the woods,
but he discovered nothing to either interest or alarm him. By the time
the sun had passed the zenith, he could stand inaction no longer. He was
not merely restless. He had become vaguely uneasy. The boat was hidden
from his view by the rocks between. In such a lonely place he would have
had no fear for the furs, had it not been for the shot and the call he
and Blaise had heard.

“Someone might slip out of the woods and down to the boat without our
catching a glimpse of him,” Hugh remarked at last. “I’m going over there
to see if everything is all right.”

To reach the boat, he was obliged to climb to his peeping place and pull
himself up the rest of the way, or else go around and across the top of
the steep rocks. He chose the latter route. The boat and furs he found
unharmed. The only trespasser was a gull that had alighted on one of the
bales and was trying with its strong, sharp beak to pick a hole in the
wrapping. He frightened the bird away, then stopped to drink from his
cupped palm.

A low cry from Blaise startled him. He glanced up just in time to see his
brother, who had followed him to the top of the rocks, drop flat.
Curiosity getting the better of caution, Hugh sprang up the slope. One
glance towards the west, and he followed the younger lad’s example and
dropped on his face.

“A canoe! They must have seen us.”

Cautiously Hugh raised his head for another look. The canoe was some
distance away. When he had first glimpsed it, it had been headed towards
the point. Now, to his surprise, it was going in the opposite direction,
going swiftly, paddles flashing in the sun.

“They have turned about, Blaise. Is it possible they didn’t see us?”

“Truly they saw us. My back was that way. I turned my head and there they
were. My whole body was in clear view. Then you came, and they must have
seen you also. They are running away from us.”

“It would seem so indeed, but what do they fear? There are four men in
that canoe, and we are but two.”

“They know not how many we are. They may have enemies on Minong, though I
never heard that any man lived here.”

“Something has certainly frightened them away. They are making good speed
to the west, towards the mainland.”

The boys remained stretched out upon the rock, only their heads raised as
they watched the departing canoe.

“They turn to the southwest now,” Blaise commented after a time. “They go
not to the mainland, but are bound for some other part of Minong.”

“They were bound for this point when we first saw them,” was Hugh’s
reply. “We don’t know what made them change their minds, but we have
cause to be grateful to it whatever——What was that?”

He sprang to his feet and turned quickly.

“Lie down,” commanded Blaise. “They will see you.”

Hugh, unheeding, plunged down to the bateau. It was undisturbed. Not a
living creature was in sight. Yet something rattling down and falling
with a splash into the water had startled him. He looked about for an
explanation. A fresh scar at the top of the slope showed where a piece of
rock had chipped off. Undoubtedly that was what he had heard. His own
foot, as he lay outstretched, had dislodged the loose, crumbling flake.

Reminded of caution, Hugh crawled back up the slope instead of going
upright. The canoe was still in sight going southwest. Both boys remained
lying flat until it had disappeared beyond the low point. Then they
returned to the low shore beneath the overhanging rock. For the present
at least there seemed to be nothing to be feared from that canoe, but
would it return, and where was the man who had fired the shot and later
sent that call ringing through the woods? Did he belong with the canoe
party? Had he gone away with them, or was he, with companions perhaps,
somewhere on the wooded ridges? The boys did not know whether to remain
where they were or go somewhere else.

The weather finally brought them to a decision. All day they had hoped
for a breeze, but when it came it brought with it threatening gray and
white clouds. Rough, dark green patches on the water, that had been so
calm all day, denoted the passing of squalls. Thunder began to rumble
threateningly, and the gray, streaked sky to the north and west indicated
that rain was falling there. The island to the northeast shrank to about
half its former height and changed its shape. It grew dimmer and grayer,
as the horizon line crept gradually nearer.

“Fog,” remarked Blaise briefly.

“It is coming in,” Hugh agreed, “and this is not a good place to be
caught in a thick fog. Shall we go back into the woods?”

“I think we had best take the bateau and go along the other side of this
point. We cannot start for the mainland to-night, and we shall need a
sheltered place for our camp.”

The fog did not seem to be coming in very rapidly, but by the time the
bateau had been shoved off, the island across the water had disappeared.
The breeze came in gusts only and was not available for sailing. So the
lads were obliged to take up their paddles again.

Beyond the tower-like rock there was a short stretch of shelving shore,
followed by abrupt, dark rocks of roughly pillared formation. Then came a
gradual slope, rough, seamed and uneven of surface. It looked indeed as
if composed of pillars, the tops of which had been sliced off with a
downward sweep of the giant Kepoochikan’s knife. The shore ahead was of a
yellowish gray color, as if bleached by the sun, slanting to the water,
with trees growing as far down as they could find anchorage and
sustenance. These sloping rocks were in marked contrast to those of the
opposite side of the point, along which the boys had come the night
before, where the cliffs and ridges rose so abruptly from the lake.

After a few minutes of paddling, the brothers found themselves passing
along a channel thickly wooded to the water-line. The land on the right
was a part of the same long point, but on the left were islands with
short stretches of water between, across which still other islands beyond
could be seen. The fog, though not so dense in this protected channel as
on the open lake, was thickening, and the boys kept a lookout for a
camping place.

When an opening on the left revealed what appeared to be a sheltered bay,
they turned in. Between two points lay two tiny islets, one so small it
could hold but five or six little trees. Paddling between the nearer
point and islet, the boys found themselves in another much narrower
channel, open to the northeast, but apparently closed in the other
direction. Going on between the thickly forested shores,—a dense mass of
spruce, balsam, white cedar, birch and mountain ash,—they saw that what
they had taken for the end of the bay was in reality an almost round
islet so thickly wooded that the shaggy-barked trunks of its big white
cedars leaned far out over the water. The explorers rounded the islet to
find that the shores beyond did not quite come together, leaving a very
narrow opening. Paddling slowly and taking care to avoid the rocks that
rose nearly to the surface and left a channel barely wide enough for the
bateau to pass through, they entered a little landlocked bay, as secluded
and peaceful as an inland pond.

“We couldn’t find a better place,” said Hugh, looking around the wooded
shores with satisfaction, “to wait for the weather to clear. We are well
hidden from any canoe that might chance to come along that outer
channel.”

The little pond was shallow. The boat had to be paddled cautiously to
avoid grounding. Below the thick fringe of trees and alders, the prow was
run up on the pebbles.

“We might as well leave the furs in the boat,” Hugh remarked.

“No.” Blaise shook his head emphatically. “We cannot be sure no one will
come in here. The furs we can hide. We ourselves can take to the woods,
but this heavy bateau we cannot hide.”

“I’m not afraid anyone will find us here.”

“We thought there was no one on Minong at all. Yet we have heard a shot
and a call and have seen a canoe.”

“You’re right. We can’t be too cautious.”

While Hugh unloaded the bales, Blaise went in search of a hiding place.
Returning in a few minutes, he was surprised to find the boat, the prow
of which had just touched the beach, now high and dry on the pebbles for
half its length. Hugh had not pulled the boat up. The water had receded.

“There is a big old birch tree there in the woods and it is hollow,”
Blaise reported. “It has been struck by lightning and is broken. We can
hide the furs there.”

“Won’t squirrels or wood-mice get at them?”

“We will put bark beneath and over them, and we shall not leave them
there long.”

“I hope not surely.”

Blaise lifted a bale and started into the woods. Hugh, with another bale,
was about to follow, when Blaise halted him.

“Walk not too close to me. Go farther over there. If we go the same way,
we shall make a beaten trail that no one could overlook. We must keep
apart and go and come different ways.”

Hugh grasped the wisdom of this plan at once. He kept considerably to the
left of Blaise until he neared the old birch, and on his return followed
still another route. He was surprised to find that the water had come up
again. The pebbles that had been exposed so short a time before were now
under water once more. The bow of the bateau was afloat and he had to
pull it farther up.

“There is a sort of tide in here,” he remarked as Blaise came out of the
woods. “It isn’t a real tide, for it comes and goes too frequently. Do
you know what causes it?”

“No, though I have seen the water come and go that way in some of the
bays of the mainland.”

“It isn’t a true tide, of course,” Hugh repeated, “but a sort of
current.”

Going lightly in their soft moccasins, the two made the trips necessary
to transport the furs. They left scarcely any traces of their passage
that might not have been made by some wild animal. Hugh climbed the big,
hollow tree which still stood firm enough to bear his weight. Down into
the great hole in the trunk he lowered a sheet of birch bark that Blaise
had stripped from a fallen tree some distance away. Then Hugh dropped
down the bales, and put another piece of bark on top. The furs were well
hidden. From the ground no one could see anything unusual about the old
tree.

Returning to the shore, the two pushed off the boat and paddled to
another spot several hundred yards away. There Hugh felled a small poplar
and cut the slender trunk into rollers which he used to pull the heavy
bateau well up on shore where it would be almost hidden by the alders.

Night was approaching and the wooded shores of the little lake were still
veiled in fog. The water was calm and the damp air spicy with the scent
of balsam and sweet with the odor of the dainty pink twin-flowers. On the
whole of the big island the boys could scarcely have found a more
peaceful spot. The woods were so thick there seemed to be no open spaces
convenient for camping, so the brothers kindled their supper fire on the
pebbles above the water-line, and lay down to sleep in the boat.




                                  XIX
                           THE BAY OF MANITOS


The night passed quietly, unbroken by any sound of beast, bird or man,
until the crying of the gulls woke the sleepers in the fog-gray dawn.
Chilled and stiff, they threw off their damp blankets and climbed out of
the bateau. By dint of much patience and a quantity of finely shredded
birch bark, a slow fire of damp wood was kindled, the flame growing
brighter as the wood dried out.

After he had swallowed his last spoonful of corn, Hugh remarked, “If we
are held here to-day, we must try for food of some kind. We haven’t
hunted or fished since we left the mainland, and our supplies are going
fast.”

Blaise nodded. “We need fire no shots to fish.”

Fishing in the little pond did not appear promising. When the boys
attempted to paddle through the passageway, they ran aground, and were
forced to wait for the water to rise and float the boat. The same
fluctuation they had noticed the day before was still going on. Luck did
not prove good in the narrow channel, and they went on into the wider one
between the long point and the row of islands. The fog was almost gone,
though the sky was still gray. Would the weather permit a start for the
mainland?

Turning to the northeast, they went the way they had come the preceding
afternoon. As they approached the end of the last island, they realized
that this was no time to attempt a crossing. Wind there was now, too much
wind. It came from the northwest, and the lake, a deep green under the
gray sky, was heaving with big waves, their tips touched with foam. The
bateau would not sail against that wind. To try to paddle the
heavily-laden boat across those waves would be the worst sort of folly.

Turning again, they went slowly back through the protected channel, Hugh
wielding the blade while Blaise fished. Luck was still against them.
Either there were no fish in the channel or they were not hungry. On
beyond the entrance to the hiding place, the two paddled. Passing the
abrupt end of an island, they came to a wider expanse of water. They were
still sheltered by the high, wooded ridges to their right, where dark
evergreens and bright-leaved birches rose in tiers. In the other
direction, they could see, between scattered islands, the open lake to
the horizon line. Misty blue hills in the distance ahead, beyond islands
and forested shores, indicated another bay, longer and wider than the one
the _Otter_ had entered.

Blaise, who was paddling now, raised his blade and looked questioningly
at Hugh. The latter answered the unspoken query. “I am for going on. We
have seen no signs of human beings since that canoe, and we need fish.”

Blaise nodded and dipped his paddle again. As they drew near a reef
running out from the end of a small island, Hugh felt his line tighten.
Fishing from the bateau was much less precarious than from a canoe.
Without endangering the balance of the boat, Hugh hauled in his line
quickly, swung in his fish, a lake trout of eight or ten pounds, and
rapped it smartly on the head with his paddle handle. He then gave the
line to Blaise and took another turn at the paddle. In less than ten
minutes, Blaise had a pink-fleshed trout somewhat smaller than Hugh’s.

Then luck deserted them again. Not another fish responded to the lure of
the hook, though they paddled back and forth beside the reef several
times. They went on along the little island and up the bay for another
mile or more without a nibble. It was a wonderful place, that lonely bay,
fascinating in its wild beauty. Down steep, densely wooded ridges, the
deep green spires of the spruces and balsams, interspersed with paler,
round-topped birches, descended in close ranks. Between the ridges, the
clear, transparent water was edged with gray-green cedars, white-flowered
mountain ashes, alders and other bushes, and dotted with wooded islands.
Far beyond the head of the bay blue hills rose against the sky. The
fishing, however, was disappointing, and paddling the bateau was tiresome
work, so the lads turned back.

As they passed close to an island, the younger boy’s quick eye caught a
movement in a dogwood near the water. A long-legged hare went leaping
across an opening.

“If we cannot get fish enough, we will eat rabbit,” said the boy, turning
the boat into a shallow curve in the shore of the little island. “I will
set some snares. If we are delayed another day, we will come in the
morning to take our catch.”

Tying the boat to an overhanging cedar tree, the brothers went ashore. On
the summit of the island, in the narrowest places along a sort of runway
evidently frequented by hares, Blaise set several snares of cedar bark
cord. While the younger brother was placing his last snare, Hugh returned
to the boat. He startled a gull perched upon the prow, and the bird rose
with a harsh cry of protest at being disturbed. Immediately the cry was
repeated twice, a little more faintly each time. Hugh looked about for
the birds that had answered. No other gulls were in sight. Then he
realized that what he had heard was a double echo, unusually loud and
clear. Forgetting caution he let out a loud, “Oh—O.” It came back
promptly, “Oh—o, o—o.”

“Be quiet!” The words were hissed in a low voice, as Blaise leaped out
from among the trees. “Canoes are coming. We must hide.”

He darted back into the woods, Hugh following. Swiftly they made their
way to the summit of the island. The growth was thin along the irregular
rock lane. Blaise dropped down and crawled, Hugh after him. Lying flat in
a patch of creeping bearberry, the younger lad raised his head a little.
Hugh wriggled to his side, and, peeping through a serviceberry bush,
looked out across the water.

The warning had been justified. Two canoes, several men in each, were
coming up the bay. The nearest canoe was not too far away for Hugh to
make out in the center a man who towered, tall and broad, above the
others. The boy remembered the gigantic Indian outlined against the sky,
as his canoe passed in the early dawn. He saw him again, standing
motionless, with folded arms, in the red light of the fire.

Blaise, close beside him, whispered in his ear, “Ohrante himself. What
shall we do?”

If the canoes came down the side of the island where the bateau was,
discovery was inevitable. For a moment, Hugh’s mind refused to work. A
gull circled out over the water, screaming shrilly. Like a ray of light a
plan flashed into the boy’s head.

“Stay here,” he whispered. “Keep still. Remember the ‘Bay of Spirits.’”

Swiftly Hugh wriggled back and darted down through the woods to the spot
where the bateau lay. He crouched behind an alder bush, drew a long
breath, and sent a loud, shrill cry across the water. Immediately it was
repeated once, twice, ringing back across the channel from the islands
and steep shore beyond. Before the final echo had died away, he sent his
voice forth again, this time in a hoarse bellow. Then, in rapid
succession, he hooted like an owl, barked like a dog, howled like a wolf,
whistled piercingly with two fingers in his mouth, imitated the mocking
laughter of the loon, growled and roared and hissed and screamed in every
manner he could devise and with all the power of his strong young lungs.
The roughened and cracked tones of his voice, not yet through turning
from boy’s to man’s, made his yells and howls and groans the more weird
and demoniac. And each sound was repeated once and again, producing a
veritable pandemonium of unearthly noises which seemed to come from every
side.

Pausing to take breath, Hugh was himself startled by another voice, not
an echo of his own, which rang out from somewhere above him, loud and
shrill. It spoke words he did not understand, and no echo came back. A
second time the voice cried out, still in the same strange language, but
now Hugh recognized the names Ohrante and Minong and then, to his
amazement, that of his own father Jean Beaupré. For an instant the lad
almost believed that this was indeed a “Bay of Spirits.” Who but a spirit
could be calling the name of Jean Beaupré in this remote place? Who but
Blaise, Beaupré’s other son? It was Blaise of course, crying out in
Ojibwa from up there at the top of the island. He had uttered some threat
against Ohrante.

Suddenly recalling his own part in the game, Hugh sent out another
hollow, threatening owl call, “Hoot-ti-toot, toot, hoot-toot!” The
ghostly voices repeated it, once, twice. Then he wailed and roared and
tried to scream like a lynx. He was in the midst of the maniacal loon
laugh, when Blaise slipped through the trees to his side.

“They run away, my brother.” The quick, flashing smile that marked him as
Jean Beaupré’s son crossed the boy’s face. “They have turned their canoes
and paddle full speed. The manitos you called up have frightened them
away. For a moment, before I understood what you were about, those spirit
cries frightened me also.”

“And you frightened me,” Hugh confessed frankly, “when you shouted from
up there.”

A grim expression replaced the lad’s smile. “The farther canoe had
turned, but the first still came on, with Ohrante urging his braves. Then
I too played spirit! But let us go back and see if they still run away.”

Hugh sent out another hoarse-voiced roar or two and Blaise added a war
whoop and a very good imitation of the angry cat scream of a lynx. Then
both slipped hurriedly through the trees to the top of the island and
sought the spot where they had first watched the approaching canoes. The
canoes were still visible, but farther away and moving rapidly down the
bay.

“They think this a bay of demons,” Hugh chuckled. “The echoes served us
well. But what was it you said to them, Blaise?”

“I said, ‘Beware! Come no farther or you die, every man!’ They heard and
held their paddles motionless. Then I said, ‘Beware of the manitos of
Minong, O Ohrante, murderer of our white son, Jean Beaupré.’”

“Blaise, I believe it _was_ Ohrante who killed father.”

“I know not. The thought came into my head that if he was the man he
might be frightened if he heard that the manitos knew of the deed. And he
was frightened.”

“Did he order the canoe turned?”

“I heard no order. He sat quite still. He made no move to stay his men
when they turned the canoe about. Ohrante is a bold man, yet he was
frightened. That I know.”

“Was it one of those canoes we saw yesterday, do you think?”

“It may be, but Ohrante was not in it. He is so big, far away though they
were, we should have seen him.”

“We couldn’t have helped seeing him. I wonder if they came around the end
of the long point. How could they in such a sea?”

“It may be that the waves have gone down out there. See how still the
water is in here now.”

“Then we can start for the mainland. We must go back. The canoes are out
of sight.”

“No, no, that would be folly. If they go straight out of this bay all
will be well, but we know not where they go or how far or where they may
lie in wait. No, no, Hugh, we have frightened them away from this spot,
but we dare not leave it ourselves until darkness comes.”




                                   XX
                         HUGH CLIMBS THE RIDGE


The small island was scarcely a half mile in circumference, and it did
not take Hugh and Blaise long to explore it. Its only inhabitants
appeared to be squirrels, hares and a few birds. Breakfast had been
light, and by mid-afternoon the boys were very hungry. The lighting of a
fire involved some risk, but they could not eat raw fish. On a bit of
open rock at the extreme upper or southwest end of the island, they made
a tiny blaze, taking care to keep the flame clear and almost smokeless,
and broiled the fish over the coals. The meal put both in better spirits
and helped them to await with more patience the coming of night.

The evening proved disappointing. The sun set behind black clouds that
came up from the west. The water was calm, the air still and oppressive,
and above the ridges lightning flashed. The prospect of making a start
across the open lake was not good. Yet in one way the threatening weather
served the lads well. The night was intensely dark. The lightning was too
far away to illuminate land or water, and this black darkness furnished
good cover. When they pushed off from the little island, they could see
scarcely a boat’s length ahead.

Close to the shores of the islands and the long point, they paddled,
avoiding wide spaces, which were, even on this dark night, considerably
lighter than the land-shadowed water. As he sat in the stern trying to
dip and raise his paddle as noiselessly as his half-brother in the bow,
Hugh felt that the very bay had somehow changed its character. That
morning the place had seemed peaceful and beautiful, but to-night it had
turned sinister and threatening. The low hanging, starless sky, the dark,
wooded islands, the towering ridge, its topmost line of tree spires a
black, jagged line against the pale flashes of lightning, the still,
lifeless water, the intense silence broken only by the far-away rumble of
thunder and the occasional high-pitched, squeaking cry of some night
bird, all seemed instinct with menace. The boy felt that at any moment a
swift canoe, with the gigantic figure of Ohrante towering in the bow,
might dart out of some black shadow. Frankly Hugh was frightened, and he
knew it. But the knowledge only made him set his teeth hard, gaze keenly
and intently into the darkness about him and ply his paddle with the
utmost care. What his half-brother’s feelings were he could not guess. He
only knew that Blaise was paddling steadily and silently.

In the thick darkness, the older boy was not quite sure of the way back
to the hidden pond, but Blaise showed no doubt or hesitation. He found
the channel between the point and the chain of islands, and warned Hugh
just when to turn through the gap into the inner channel. When it came to
feeling the way past the round islet and through the narrow passage, Hugh
ceased paddling and trusted entirely to Blaise. The latter strained his
eyes in the effort to see into the darkness, but so black was it on every
hand that even he had to depend more on feeling with his paddle blade
than on his sense of sight. It was partly luck that he succeeded in
taking the boat through without worse accident than grating a rock. He
did not attempt to cross the little pond, but ran the bateau up on the
pebbles just beyond the entrance.

Hugh drew a long sigh of relief. They were back safe in the hidden pond
near the cache of furs. The sense of menace that had oppressed him was
suddenly lifted, and he felt an overpowering physical and mental
weariness. Blaise must have had some similar feeling, for he had not a
word to say as they climbed out of the bateau and pulled it farther up.
In silence he lay down beside Hugh in the bottom of the boat. In spite of
the rumbling of the thunder, and the flashing of the lightning, the two
boys fell asleep immediately.

The storm passed around and no rain fell, but the sleepers were awakened
towards dawn by a sharp change in the weather. The air had turned cold,
wind rustled the trees, broken clouds were scudding across the sky
uncovering clear patches. The morning dawned bright. The little pond was
still, but it was impossible to tell what the weather might be outside.
The only way to find out was to go see. Their adventure of the day before
had made the boys more than ever anxious to get away from Isle Royale at
the first possible moment. Yet the thought that Ohrante might be lurking
somewhere near made them cautious. They hesitated to leave their hiding
place until they were sure they could strike out across the lake. To load
the furs and start out, only to be obliged to turn back, seemed a double
risk.

“If the lake is rough it is likely that Ohrante and his band have not
gone far,” Blaise remarked. “They may be in this very bay.”

“That does not follow,” Hugh replied quickly and with better reasoning.
“There was a long interval between the time when we saw them and the
coming of the storm-clouds. Because the lake was rough in the morning is
no sign it was rough all day. They must have come in here from somewhere,
and we know that the wind changed. The water in the bay was as still as
glass last night. Ohrante was surely well frightened and I have little
doubt they made good speed away from the Bay of Spirits.” Hugh was silent
for a few moments. Then he asked abruptly, “What would happen if we
should encounter Ohrante? He can’t know what brought us here, and we have
done him no harm. Why should he harm us when he has nothing against us?”

“He has this against us, that we are the sons of Jean Beaupré.”

“He doesn’t know we are.”

“He knows me. He has seen me more than once and knows me for the son of
my father. Ohrante forgets not those he has seen.”

“I didn’t know he knew you. He can’t know me. Probably he doesn’t even
know that father had another son. I’ll go alone in the bateau, Blaise,
down the channel, and see how the lake looks.”

“No, no,” Blaise objected. “You must not take such a risk. If you go out
there, I will go too.”

“That would spoil the whole plan. If Ohrante catches sight of you, it
will be all up with both of us. He doesn’t know me. If he glimpses me, he
may even be afraid to show himself. He may think me one of a party of
white men, and he is a fugitive from justice.”

Blaise shook his head doubtfully.

“Well, at any rate,” Hugh protested, “I shall have a better chance if you
aren’t with me. I don’t believe I shall see anything of Ohrante or his
men, but I run less risk alone. I will be cautious. I’ll not expose
myself more than I can help. Instead of going out along the point by
water, I’ll paddle across the channel and then take to the woods. I can
climb to the top of the ridge, under cover all the way, and look out
across the lake. It can’t be very far up there. I shall be back in an
hour. You must stay here and guard the furs.”

The expression of the younger lad’s face betrayed that he did not like
this new plan much better than the first one, but he voiced no further
objection.

Hugh pushed off the bateau, waved his hand to the sober-faced Blaise, and
paddled through the narrow waterway and out of sight. After his brother
had gone, Blaise picked his way along the shore of the pond and into the
woods to the cache. He found no signs of disturbance around the old
birch, and, climbing up, he looked down into the hollow. The rotten wood
and dead leaves he and Hugh had strewn over the bark cover seemed
undisturbed. Satisfied that the furs were safe, Blaise climbed down
again. He was reminded though that Hugh still had the packet. He wished
he had asked his elder brother to leave it behind.

The half-breed boy waited with the patience inherited from his Indian
mother. But when the sun reached its highest point he began to wonder.
Surely it could not take Hugh so long to cross to the point, climb to the
top and return. From experience of untracked woods and rough ridges,
Blaise knew the trip was probably a harder one than Hugh had imagined,
but the latter was not inexperienced in rough going. Unless he had
encountered extraordinary difficulties, had been obliged to go far
around, or had become lost, he should have been back long before. The
possibility that Hugh had become lost, Blaise dismissed from his mind at
once. With the ridge ahead and the water behind him, only the very
stupidest of men could have lost himself in daylight. That he had come to
some crack or chasm he could not cross or some cliff he could not scale,
and had been compelled to go far out of his way, was possible. Blaise had
come to know Hugh’s stubborn nature. If he had started to go to the top
of the ridge, there he would go, if it was in the power of possibility.

There seemed to be nothing Blaise could do but wait. Even if he had
thought it wise to follow his elder brother, he had no boat. Sunset came
and still no Hugh. The lad felt he could delay action no longer.

The pond was in the interior of a small island. Blaise made up his mind
to cross to the shore bordering on the channel that separated the island
from the long point. Through the woods he took as direct a route as he
could. The growth was thick, but there was still plenty of light. In a
very few minutes he saw the gleam of water among the trees ahead. He
slipped through cautiously, not to expose himself until he had taken
observations. His body concealed by a thick alder bush, he looked across
the strip of water, studying the opposite shore line.

The shore was in shadow now and the trees grew to the water. Letting his
eyes travel along foot by foot, he caught sight of the thing he sought, a
bit of weather-stained wood, not the trunk or branch of a dead tree,
projecting a little way from the shadow of a cedar. That was the end of
the bateau. Hugh had crossed the channel, had left his boat and gone into
the woods.

Slipping between the bushes, Blaise glanced along his own side of the
channel, then made his way quickly to the spot where a birch tree had
toppled from its insecure hold into the water. With his sharp hatchet,
the boy quickly severed the roots that were mooring the fallen tree to
the shore. Then, with some difficulty, he succeeded in shoving the birch
farther out into the channel and climbing on the trunk. His weight, as he
sat astride the tree trunk between the branches, pulled it down a little,
but the upper part of his body was well above water. The channel was
deep, with some current, which caught the tree and floated it away from
shore. Like most woods Indians and white voyageurs, Blaise was not
skilled in swimming, but the water was calm and, as long as he clung to
his strange craft, he was in no danger of drowning. Leaning forward, he
cut off a branch to use as a paddle and with it was able to make slow
headway across. He could not guide himself very well, and the current
bore him down. He succeeded with his branch paddle in keeping the tree
from turning around, however. It went ashore, the boughs catching in a
bush that grew on the water’s edge, some distance below the spot where
the bateau was drawn up in the shelter of the leaning cedar.




                                  XXI
                          THE GRINNING INDIAN


When Hugh passed out of the narrow channel into the wider one, he ran his
eyes searchingly along the opposite shore, alert for any signs of human
beings. Then he looked to the right and left, up and down the channel and
the shores of the small islands. He saw nothing to cause him
apprehension. Putting more strength into his paddle strokes, he crossed
as quickly as he could, and ran the bateau in beside a leaning cedar tree
with branches that swept the water. The bow touched the shore, and Hugh
climbed out and made the boat fast. He felt sure it would be concealed
from down channel by the thick foliage of the cedar. From up channel the
bateau was not so well hidden, but this place seemed to be the only spot
that offered any concealment whatever, so he was forced to be content. He
would not be gone long anyway, and he was well satisfied that Ohrante and
his band would not return soon to the Bay of Manitos.

This was by no means the first time Hugh had been through untracked woods
and over rough ground, yet he found the trip to the ridge top longer and
more difficult than he had expected. The growth, principally of
evergreens, was dense and often troublesome to push through. The bedrock,
a few feet from shore, was covered deeply with soft leaf mould and
decayed wood and litter, forming a treacherous footing. Sometimes he
found it firm beneath his feet, again he would sink half-way to his
knees. Wherever a tree had fallen, lightening the dense shade, tangles of
ground yew had sprung up. The rise on this side of the point was gradual
compared with the abrupt cliffs of the northwest side, but the slope
proved to be, not an unbroken grade, but an irregular succession of low
ridges with shallow gullies between. By the general upward trend,
occasional glimpses of the water behind him, and the angle at which the
sunlight came through the trees, Hugh kept his main direction, going in
as straight a line as he could. Under ordinary circumstances he would
have used his hatchet to blaze his way, so that he might be sure of
returning by the same route, but he hesitated to leave so plain a trail.
It was not likely that Ohrante would come across the track, but Hugh was
taking no chances. If the giant Iroquois should come down the channel and
find the bateau, a blazed trail into the woods would make pursuit
altogether too easy. Though he was in too great a hurry to take any
particular care to avoid leaving footprints, Hugh did not mark his trail
intentionally and even refrained from cutting his way through the thick
places. The whole distance from the shore to the summit of the highest
ridge probably did not exceed a mile, and did not actually take as long
as it seemed in the climbing.

He hoped that he might come out in a bare spot where he could see across
the water, but he was disappointed. The ridge was almost flat topped and
trees cut off his view in every direction. Going on across the summit,
however, he pushed his way among the growth, to find himself standing on
the very rim of an almost vertical descent. He looked directly down upon
the tops of the sturdy trees and shrubs that clung to the rock by
thrusting their roots far into holes and crannies. Beyond stretched the
lake, rich blue under a clear sky. A little to his left, a projecting
block of rock a few feet below offered a chance for a better view. He let
himself down on the rock and took an observation. The lake was not too
rough to venture out upon, when the need of crossing was so great. He
noted with satisfaction that the breeze was only moderate. The direction,
a little east of north, was not unfavorable for reaching the mainland,
though steering a straight course for the Kaministikwia would be
impossible.

Hugh turned to climb back the way he had come down. He gave a gasp,
almost lost his footing, and seized a sturdy juniper root to keep himself
from falling. Directly above him, on the verge of the ridge, stood a
strange man, from his features, dark skin and long black hair evidently
an Indian,—but not Ohrante. It flashed through Hugh’s mind that on level
ground he might be a match for this fellow. They were not on level ground
though. The Indian had the advantage of position. Moreover Hugh’s only
arms were the hatchet and knife in his belt. The Indian carried a musket
ready in his hand. That he realized to the full his advantage was proved
by the malicious grin on his bronze face. There was no friendliness in
that grin, only malevolence and vindictiveness.

Hugh knew himself to be in a bad position. Probably the Indian was one of
Ohrante’s followers, and they were a wild crew, outlaws and renegades,
their hand against every man and every man’s hand against them. The
picture of the prisoner being tortured in the firelight crossed the boy’s
mind in a vivid flash, and a shudder crept up his back. Then the grin on
the Indian’s face sent a wave of anger over Hugh that steadied him. He
must be cool at all costs and not show fear.

Moving a step, to a more secure footing, he looked the fellow straight in
the eyes. “Bo jou,” Hugh said, using the corruption of the French “Bon
jour” common among traders and Indians.

“Bo jou, white man,” the other replied in French.

Both were silent for a moment. Hugh did not know what to say next and the
Indian seemed content to say nothing. Suddenly Hugh made up his mind,
resolving on a bold course.

“What is this place?” he asked. “Is it island or mainland?”

“Ne compr’ney,” was the only answer.

Hugh took the phrase to be an attempt to say that the other did not
understand. He repeated his questions in French, then tried English, but
the Indian merely stared at him, the sardonic grin still distorting his
lips, and replied in the same manner. Either he really did not
understand, the two French phrases being all the white man’s speech he
knew, or he did not wish to talk. Yet Hugh made another attempt at
conversation.

“I was driven here in the storm last night,” he volunteered, “and my
canoe wrecked and my companion drowned. We were on our way down shore
from the New Fort with our winter supplies, but they are all lost. What
is this place? I never saw it before and I do not like it. This morning I
heard strange sounds, unlike any I ever heard made by man or animal. The
devil was at large I think,” and he crossed himself in the French manner.

During the speech Hugh had kept his eyes closely fixed on the Indian’s
face. He thought when he mentioned the strange sounds that he detected a
quiver of interest, but it was gone in an instant. The fellow merely
repeated his singsong “Ne compr’ney.” There was no use saying more.
Determined not to show that he expected or feared any violence, Hugh
started to climb up the projecting rock. Somewhat to the boy’s surprise,
the Indian made no move to stop him. However, he kept his gun ready for
instant use.

After gaining the top Hugh was in a quandary how to proceed. He did not
believe the man’s intentions were friendly. Would it be wise to strike
first? At the thought, his hand, almost unconsciously, sought his knife.
Before he could grasp the handle, the Indian made a swift movement, and
the end of the musket barrel rested against Hugh’s chest. The flint-lock
musket was primed and cocked, ready to fire. Resistance was useless. Hugh
stood motionless, looked the fellow in the eye and feigned anger.

“What do you mean?” he cried, trying to make his meaning plain by his
voice and manner even though his captor could not understand the words.
“What do you mean by threatening me, a white man, with your musket?”

The gun was moved back a trifle, but the bronze face continued to grin
maliciously. To show that he was not afraid, Hugh took a step forward,
and opened his mouth to speak again, but the words were not uttered. As
his weight shifted to his forward foot, he was seized from behind, and
thrown sidewise, his head crashing against the trunk of a tree.




                                  XXII
                      BLAISE FOLLOWS HUGH’S TRAIL


Blaise had no difficulty finding the place where Hugh had gone into the
woods. The white boy thought he had been careful about leaving a trail,
but to the half-breed lad the indications were plain enough. Most of the
tracks were such as might have been made by any large animal, but Blaise
knew Hugh had landed at this spot intending to go directly to the ridge
top. The younger boy was confident that trampled undergrowth, prints in
the leaf mould, freshly broken branches, were all signs of his brother’s
passage.

At first he followed the trail easily, but the long northern twilight was
waning. As the darkness gathered in the woods, tracking grew increasingly
difficult. Blaise had no wish to attract attention by lighting a torch.
As he penetrated the thick growth, he was not only unable to find Hugh’s
trail, but was obliged sometimes to feel his own way and was in grave
doubt whether he was going aright. Coming out into a more open spot,
where several trees had fallen, he examined, as well as he could in the
dim light, the moss-covered trunks for some sign that Hugh had climbed
over them. A fresh break where the decayed wood had crumbled away under
foot, a patch of bruised moss, the delicate fruiting stalks broken and
crushed, were enough to convince him that he was still on the right
track.

Alternately losing the trail and finding it again, he came to the summit
of the ridge. Crossing the top, he found himself on the rim of the cliff,
but not in the same spot where his brother had come out. He had missed
Hugh’s trail on the last upward slope, and was now a hundred feet or more
to the left of the projecting block of rock. For a few minutes Blaise
stood looking about him. He glanced out over the water, noting that the
sky was partly cloud covered. He could make out the low point, and he
realized that the rock shore with the fissures must lie almost directly
below him. The twin coves, where he and Hugh had camped, could not be far
to the left. Blaise was not concerned just now with either place, he was
merely obeying the Indian instinct to note his whereabouts and to take
his bearings.

The lad was at a loss how to proceed. That Hugh had reached the rim of
the ridge somewhere along here seemed more than probable. Where had he
gone then? Blaise could scarcely believe that his elder brother had
attempted to climb down that abrupt descent. If he had gone down there
and through the woods and over the rocks to the water, he could have got
no better view of the open lake,—and Hugh had been in haste. No, he had
certainly not gone down there of his own accord. If he had started back
the way he had come, what had happened to him? Blaise shook his head in
perplexity. Of only one thing was he sure. Some disaster had overtaken
Hugh. Had he made a misstep and plunged down the cliff, or had Ohrante
something to do with his disappearance?

The first thing to do, Blaise decided, was to search along the ridge top
for some further sign of Hugh or of what had befallen him. He turned to
the right and made his way along as close to the edge as he could,
stooping down every few paces to seek for some clue. The night was
lighter now, for the moon had come out from behind the clouds. When he
reached the spot just above the projecting rocks, Blaise stopped still.
There was no need to search for signs here, they were quite plain. The
moon shone down on the little open space where Hugh and the strange
Indian had confronted one another. It was clear to the half-breed boy
that there had been a struggle. The gray caribou moss was crushed and
trampled and torn up by the roots. A branch of a little jackpine on the
edge of the opening showed a fresh break and hanging from that branch was
a torn scrap of deerskin. But that was not all. Lying on the moss, in
plain sight in the moonlight, was a small, dark object, a bit of steel
such as was commonly used with a piece of flint for fire making. Blaise
picked up the steel. It was the one Hugh carried, beyond doubt.

What did those marks of struggle mean? They were too far back to indicate
that Hugh had lost his footing and slipped over the edge, seizing the
tree to keep himself from falling. No, that was quite impossible, for the
jackpine grew at least ten feet from the rim of the cliff. Had Hugh
fought with some animal? Blaise knew of no animal likely, at that season
of the year, to make an unprovoked attack upon a man. He felt sure that
Hugh had too much sense to strike first with knife or hatchet at a bear
or moose. Moreover if an animal had slain him it would scarcely have
carried him away. Every indication pointed to an encounter, not with a
beast, but with a man. Hugh must have come across Ohrante or some of his
followers. Had they killed him or taken him prisoner? If they had killed
him they would not have troubled to take away his body. They would have
taken his scalp and gone on their way,—unless of course they had thrown
him over the cliff. Blaise looked down the abrupt descent, now bathed in
moonlight. Should he seek down there for Hugh or in some other direction?
He decided to look around a little more before attempting to climb down.

Almost immediately he found further traces. Beyond the jackpine more
crushed moss and broken bushes and trampled undergrowth showed plainly
that someone, more than one man probably, had gone that way not many
hours before, had gone boldly and confidently, careless of leaving a
trail. Blaise dropped on his knees to make a closer examination. The
moonlight helped him, and he soon came to the conclusion, from the shape
of a footprint impressed clearly in a bit of loose earth, that one man at
least had gone in that direction, whether he had come that way or not.
The print was too large for Hugh’s foot, but, a little farther on, Blaise
found another smaller track that he thought might be Hugh’s. It pointed
the same way as the larger print.

The beginning of the trail was now plain, but could he follow it in the
darkness of the woods? He must try anyway. He would go as far as he
could, taking care not to lose the tracks.

Blaise did not succeed in following far. No longer was he aided by any
knowledge of the general direction those he was pursuing would be likely
to take. Under the trees the moonlight was of little assistance. He soon
lost the tracks and was compelled to go back to the starting point. He
tried again and lost the trail a second time. A white boy, in his anxiety
and impatience, would probably have persisted in the hopeless attempt,
and would have lost the trail and himself. But Blaise was part Indian.
Anxious though he was over Hugh’s fate, he knew when to wait as well as
when to go forward. By daylight he could doubtless find the trail easily,
and could cover in a few minutes ground that in darkness might take him
hours, if he could find his way over it at all. He seated himself on a
cushion of dry caribou moss near the rim of the ridge to wait,
sleeplessly and watchfully.

Dawn came at last. When the light was strong enough to make it possible
to find his way through the woods, Blaise again took up the trail. The
tracks he had started to follow and had lost in the first bit of dense
growth, led him, not through, but around the thick place, into a sort of
open rock lane bordered with trees and running along the ridge top. To
his great surprise, when he reached the end of the open stretch, he came
upon a clearly defined trail. It was not merely a track made by one or
two men coming and going once. It gave evidence of having been travelled
a number of times. The soft moccasins of the Indian do not wear a path as
quickly as the boots of the white man, but this trail was well enough
trodden to be followed easily. No blazes marked the trees and no clearing
had been done other than the breaking or hacking off of an occasional
troublesome branch. The men who made that trail had gone around the
obstacles, instead of cutting through or removing them, but any white man
who knew anything of woods’ running could have followed it.

The half-breed boy hastened along without hesitation, scarcely thinking
of the trail itself, but with eyes and ears open for signs of other human
beings. That travelled way must lead, he felt sure, to some more or less
permanent camp. Had Hugh fallen into Ohrante’s hands or into those of
some tribe of permanent inhabitants of Minong? Blaise hoped heartily that
it might be the latter. Even if they were inclined to be hostile, he
feared such an unknown people less than he did the too well known
Iroquois.

Going noiselessly, with every sense alert, the boy caught sight of
something moving among the trees ahead. Instantly he dropped to the
ground and slipped like a snake among trees and bushes and through
undergrowth to the left of the trail. Behind a dense clump of balsams
that had sprung up about a parent tree, he lay motionless. When he
thought he had waited long enough, he crept cautiously back towards the
trail. Moving bushes a little distance away in the direction from which
he had come, a glimpse of a black head told the boy he had just missed an
encounter.

A short distance farther on, the trail turned to the right and plunged
down an abrupt descent. Then the way wound up and down over low ridges,
the outer slopes of which were steep to abruptness, and through boggy
ravines with thick growth and treacherous moss and mud. Following a
general downward trend, the trail led at last to almost level ground. Now
Blaise went forward with the utmost caution, for he felt that the end
must be near at hand. On this lower ground, near the water, the village
or camp must be situated. Presently the lad stopped, stood still and
sniffed the air. He smelled smoke.




                                 XXIII
                               A CAPTIVE


Hugh’s fall stunned him for a moment, and that moment was his undoing.
When he came to himself, he was propped against the tree, his knife and
hatchet gone. Two Indians were binding his wrists with a rawhide rope.
Dizzy, his head spinning, he fought to free himself, but to no avail. The
knots were tied, and he struggled to his feet to confront the malicious
grin of the young Indian whom he had first encountered, and the ugly,
lowering face of another, older savage of short, squat figure. It must
have been this fellow’s long, strong arms that had seized and thrown the
boy. Recovering himself a little, Hugh looked desperately about for a way
of escape. His captors understood that glance. The squat man seized his
arm in a grip that almost made the boy cry out, while the young fellow,
who had picked up his long gun, raised it threateningly.

In spite of his aching head, the sickness at his stomach and a general
feeling of misery and despair, physical and mental, the boy made an
heroic effort to stand erect and, with calm and impassive face, look his
enemies in the eye. He knew that to show weakness or fear would only make
matters worse. He must assume an indifference and unconcern he was far
from feeling, at the same time keeping alert for any chance of gaining an
advantage.

He was not left long in doubt of his captors’ immediate intentions. With
a guttural grunt, the man who held his arm turned him about and led him
around the jackpine, the other following, musket ready. They went through
the woods, and came out into an open rock lane bordered with trees and
bushes. There they turned to the right. It was of no use to struggle.
Hugh had no chance to get away. Even if he had been able to break loose
from the iron grip of the squat man, or, by thrusting out a foot, trip
him and twist himself from the Indian’s grasp, he could not hope to
escape the fellow with the gun. The latter would most certainly have shot
him or clubbed him into unconsciousness.

Hugh went in silence, until they entered a trail leading from the open
lane. Then he attempted a question. “Where do you take me, to whom?” he
asked.

Receiving no answer but the young fellow’s singsong “Ne compr’ney” and a
sullen grunt from the older savage, the boy made another attempt. Loudly
and vigorously, to make his anger clear by his voice and manner, he
uttered an indignant protest. What did they mean by such treatment of a
white man of peaceable and friendly intentions, who had never done wrong
to them or to any other Ojibwa? He voiced his indignation in both English
and French, apparently without effect, except to cause the squat Indian
to tighten his grip and the grinning one to prod the captive in the back
with his musket.

Curiously enough, that prod, instead of frightening the lad, made him
blaze with anger. The blood surged to his face. With difficulty he
restrained himself from turning to give battle. But one cool spot in his
brain told him that such an act would be suicide. He must keep his wrath
under control and use guile instead of force, if he was ever to see
Blaise again and escape with their joint inheritance. So he controlled
himself and went quietly where his captors led him. Questions and
protests were worse than useless.

It was not a path they were following, merely a trail trodden down more
or less by use. As Indians and woodsmen always go single file, the way
was narrow. The squat Indian went ahead, the end of the rawhide that
bound Hugh’s wrists wrapped about his hand. He went rapidly, and Hugh,
his arms extended in front of him, had to step quickly to keep from being
dragged. Behind him the other man gave him an occasional reminder by
touching him between the shoulders with the gun barrel. Every time he
felt that touch, wrath surged up in Hugh. The boy would have been less
than human if he had not been afraid of the fate in store for him, but he
was proving himself the true son of his father. Every threat or insult
produced in him a hot anger that, for the moment, completely blotted out
fear. Yet he strove to hold himself in check, to keep calm and silent and
to appear unconscious of the fellow behind him.

Had Hugh not been active and light-footed, he could not have kept pace
with his guards on the rough and winding trail. The squat Indian showed
not the slightest consideration for his captive. Hugh knew that if he
lagged, tripped or fell, he would be dragged along regardless of his
comfort. In addition he would probably be kicked or prodded by the man
behind. So he exerted himself to keep up the swift pace with truly Indian
agility.

The trail turned to the right and led to the edge of an abrupt decline.
The older Indian let go his hold of the boy, to climb down, but the other
man kept the muzzle of his gun between Hugh’s shoulders. The lad wondered
if the two expected him to go down that almost vertical descent with
bound arms. He was still wondering when the Indian in front reached the
bottom. The man in the rear, without warning, suddenly seized the boy
about the waist, swung him off his feet, and literally dropped him over
the edge.

Hugh went sliding down, trying to save himself from too rapid a descent
by gripping the rock with his moccasined feet. In a flash he saw that he
would land right in the arms of the man at the bottom. If he could only
strike the Indian in the stomach with enough force to knock him down, and
then dodge aside swiftly before the other fellow could pick up his gun
again—— Far more quickly than it can be told the plan was born in the
boy’s mind. The squat Indian’s long arms were stretched out and up. His
powerful hands gripped Hugh. The lad tried to throw himself forward, but
the sturdy figure stood firm. The Indian swung Hugh around, and in an
instant had him flat on his back in a tangle of prickly juniper. The
captive’s one attempt to escape had failed.

Bruised and battered by his slide down the rocks, Hugh was jerked to his
feet. The younger savage was beside him now, ready to take up his
position in the rear. The two wasted no time. The older man gripped the
rawhide again and the march was resumed. Speed was not slackened even in
the steep places, and Hugh was put to it to keep up and not lose his
footing. The general course was downward, until they reached almost level
ground, thickly wooded with evergreens, where the trail led over many
fallen tree trunks, decayed and moss covered. Then they went up a few
feet of rise, like a low and ruinous rock wall. To his left among the
trees, Hugh could see the gleam of water.

The squat Indian sprang down from the natural wall, and Hugh leaped with
him, to avoid being dragged down. He found himself almost on a level with
the water, among scattering broad-leaved trees and bushes. A few steps
farther and, rounding a clump of mountain ash, he came in sight of a
small birch bark lodge, of the conical wigwam form sometimes used by the
Ojibwas for temporary dwellings to be occupied a few days or a week or
two. The more permanent lodges were commonly of a different shape with
rounded roofs. In a moment another, slightly larger wigwam came in view.
A thin curl of smoke rose from the remains of a fire, and a canoe lay on
the sand beach. No human beings were to be seen.

The two Indians marched their captive to the cleared spot where the fire
smouldered. Then, before the boy realized his intention, the squat man
turned quickly, put his arm about Hugh’s waist, tripping him cleverly at
the same time, threw him backwards to the ground and sat upon him.
Without a word spoken, the grinning savage dropped his musket, seized a
strip of rawhide and set to work to tie the prisoner’s ankles together.
Hugh attempted to kick, but the squat man prodded him unmercifully in the
stomach. The boy realized that he could not help matters by struggling.
The younger Indian completed his work, rose to his feet and grinned down
at him derisively. The older man tested the cord on Hugh’s wrists, pulled
it a little tighter and got to his feet, to the great relief of the sore
and suffering captive. The squat Indian was heavily built, and Hugh felt
that a few moments more of that weight on his middle would crush him
flat. He strove to control his features, however, and not to let his
misery, indignation and despair show in his face.

Evidently the pair considered their work completed, or perhaps they had
tired of tormenting the prisoner. At any rate they left him to himself.
For a time Hugh lay perfectly still, too miserable for effort of body or
mind. His head still pained him from the fall against the tree, he had
several sore bruises on his body, his arms and shoulders ached from being
held so long in one position, the thongs cut into his wrists and ankles,
and he was sick at the stomach from the treatment he had just received.
As he lay on his back, his captors were no longer within his range of
vision, but he did not flatter himself that he was unwatched. That the
two were not far away he knew from the sound of their voices that came to
him at intervals from somewhere down by the water. There was no need for
them to watch him closely, he thought bitterly. Bound as he was and
unable to even raise himself to his feet, he had not the slightest chance
of escape.

After a while he began to feel better, and his hopes rose a little.
Turning his head from side to side, he looked about for some way to help
himself. He could no longer hear the voices of the Indians nor could he
catch any glimpse of them. Everything about him was quiet, except for the
ripple of the water on the sand and gravel of the beach, and the
occasional cries of a small flock of gulls.

There was something familiar about this spot, this stretch of sandy
ground, with its sparse growth of trees and bushes, and its curving
beach. Beyond and above, the tree-covered ridges towered. Hugh managed to
roll over on his side, and looked across a narrow blue channel to another
thickly wooded shore, where the trees ran down to the water. He knew the
place now. On that stretch of sand and pebbles, Captain Bennett had
beached the _Otter_. Hugh himself had helped to clear the very spot where
the wigwams now stood. The place looked somewhat different, to be sure,
with all the ice and snow gone and the trees and bushes in full summer
green.

Hugh’s thoughts turned from the memory of that other camp to the present
situation. He pulled at the thongs that bound him and tried to loosen
them by wriggling his hands and feet, but it was of no use. The cords,
instead of loosening, only cut into his wrists and ankles more painfully.
He was just about to attempt to sit up, when the gruff voice of the older
of his captors sounded close by, just beyond his head. Hugh composed
himself to lie still. The Indian came near and looked down frowningly on
the lad, then seated himself at a little distance and went to work on a
piece of deerskin he was fashioning into moccasins. Hugh was familiar
enough with Indian ways to grasp the significance of the fact that the
man was making his own moccasins. That was women’s work, if there were
women about. It was evident that in this camp there were no squaws, or
the braves would not be doing squaws’ work.

Growing tired of watching his guard at his task, Hugh closed his eyes.
The sun was warm and in this sheltered place there was little breeze. He
felt very tired and all things around him conspired to make him drowsy.
In a few minutes the captive had fallen fast asleep.




                                  XXIV
                       IN THE HANDS OF THE GIANT


The sound of voices waked Hugh. He opened his eyes to find, looking down
on him, the young Indian and a repulsive fellow with a strip of dirty red
cloth bound about his black hair. The latter had evidently just come from
visiting his snares, for he was carrying two rabbits. When he saw that
Hugh was awake, he turned away, the young fellow, after favoring the boy
with another of his malicious grins, following him. From the position of
the sun Hugh knew that he had not slept long, but his head felt better
and the sick feeling had passed.

Long and tedious hours of waiting followed. At least one of the Indians
was in sight and hearing every moment. Hugh was hungry, but he was
offered no food, thirsty, but he disdained to ask for a drink. He strove
to lie quiet and to keep his feelings of discomfort, anxiety and
apprehension from his face. The ground was hard, the sun beat down upon
his head and face, and he could not move to a more comfortable spot. Only
with difficulty could he roll over on his side. His mental suffering,
however, was far worse than his physical discomfort and pain.

Why was he treated in this way? Into whose hands had he fallen? What were
they going to do to him and for what or whom were they waiting? The one
possible explanation of his treatment was that he had fallen into the
hands of Ohrante’s little band of outlaws. Why should even they want to
take him prisoner? Was Ohrante looking for the hidden cache? A cold chill
ran up Hugh’s spine, as he remembered the packet in the breast of his
shirt. If he had only had sense enough to leave that packet with Blaise!
It must surely come to light should his captors strip him to torment or
torture him. Torture! He recalled the fiendish scene in the firelight.
Was that what it meant to fall into the hands of the giant Iroquois? The
boy dared not think of that. He tried to assure himself that the outlaw
had nothing against him. At any rate he must not give way to fear. If he
could keep cool and alert, he might yet find some way out of the perils
that threatened him. He _must_ find a way.

With such thoughts running through his head, the time dragged painfully.
Late in the afternoon, the younger Indian renewed the fire and hung over
it an iron pot of water. Into the pot he put several handfuls of wild
rice and rabbit meat cut into small pieces. The odor was tempting to
Hugh’s nostrils, but he strove to keep his hunger from showing in his
face.

Sunset came. The stew was ready, but the pot was not unslung. The three
Indians sat about the fire, the younger one whiling away the time by
playing on a crude native flute with three holes. The sounds produced
were mournful and monotonous and did not inspire cheerfulness. The other
two savages sat idle, eying the seething mixture in the kettle, but none
made a move to dip into it. They were certainly waiting for the return of
the rest of the band. Unusually well disciplined savages, Hugh thought
them, to postpone their own supper until their chief arrived.

The squat man turned his head, gave a little grunt, rose and walked away
towards the beach. The young fellow ceased his flute playing and
followed, the other remaining to watch the stew. Hugh heard a canoe grate
lightly on the gravel, a few words exchanged. He rolled over on his side,
and saw, striding towards him—Ohrante. There could be no mistaking that
huge form, looking more gigantic than ever as it towered over the
prostrate lad.

For an instant Hugh forgot all else in wonder at the Indian’s size.
Ohrante was not less than seven feet in height, with proportionate
breadth of shoulder and depth of chest. Then, as he gazed into the face
looking down on him, a veritable panic of fear shook the lad. It was not
an ugly face. In its outlines and proportions, its strongly cut, regular
features, it was unusually handsome for an Indian. But there was an
inhuman hardness about it, a fiercely piercing quality in the eyes, cruel
lines about nostrils and lips, a general expression of bitter and
vindictive malevolence that appalled the boy. A shudder passed through
him, yet, fascinated, he could not take his eyes from the dark, piercing
ones.

Ohrante spoke, and Hugh gave a start of surprise. It was not the words
that amazed him. All the Indian said was, “Who are you, white man? How
come you here?” A simple question in curiously accented English. It was
the voice that surprised Hugh. Weak, high pitched, almost squeaking, such
a voice as the boy had never heard in an Indian before, it was
ludicrously incongruous with the size and appearance of the evil giant.
Instantly the spell in which Ohrante had held him was broken. So great
was the revulsion of feeling that Hugh actually wanted to laugh. Luckily
he realized that to take any notice of the giant’s weak point would
surely arouse his bitterest hatred. Self-possession regained, Hugh
controlled his features and answered steadily. He had had plenty of time
that long afternoon to plan the story he was to tell.

“I am Hugh McNair. I came here by accident. High winds drove me out of my
course and against the great rocks yonder.” He jerked his head in the
direction of the mouth of the bay. “My canoe was wrecked, all my winter
supplies lost, my comrade drowned.” He paused, rather surprised at the
readiness with which he told his false tale. Ordinarily Hugh was
truthful, inclined to regard a lie as a coward’s refuge, but he had no
intention of divulging his true name and purpose to his father’s
bitterest enemy.

Ohrante seemed to consider the reply. Then he spoke again. “Minong far
from mainland,” he said in his bad English. He was suspicious of the
tale, but the boy was prepared for doubt.

“We were going from the New Fort at the Kaministikwia,” Hugh went on to
explain. “We had sold our furs and had all our supplies for the winter.
Also we were very sleepy. We had drunk deep and we did not take care
where we went. Then came the wind.”

Hugh was watching Ohrante’s face closely, but he could not tell whether
the Iroquois believed the story or not, or indeed how much of it he
understood. He made no reply except a queer little sound in his throat.
Because of his high-pitched voice, that sound could not be called a
grunt, and Hugh was at a loss to know whether it meant assent, disbelief
or contempt. Before he could add anything more to his story, the giant
turned abruptly away, walked over to the fire and seated himself on a
log.

Immediately one of his followers removed the pot, and, with a
long-handled, crudely carved wooden spoon, ladled out a generous portion
of the stew into a birch bark dish. The chief received the dish in
silence and commenced to eat, picking out the bits of meat on the point
of his knife, and taking up the rice on the flat of the blade. After he
had finished the more solid part of the food, he drank the soup and
passed the dish back to be refilled.

The other Indians, eight in number, stood or sat about in silence. Not
until the chief had finished his second portion and had signified, by
turning the empty dish upside down on the ground, that he had had enough,
did they venture to approach the kettle, each with his own bark or wooden
bowl. Ohrante said something to the squat man who had been one of Hugh’s
captors, pointing to the boy as he spoke. At once the man, carrying his
own dish of stew, went over to the captive, seated himself cross-legged
beside him, took up a piece of meat on the point of his knife and held it
to Hugh’s lips. In this way he fed the lad about half the contents of the
dish, reserving the rest for himself for fear the kettle might be empty.
Neither the wooden dish nor the knife blade was very clean, but Hugh was
too hungry to be particular. He could have eaten more, but he was
thankful to get anything. Whatever the fate in store for him, he was
apparently not to be starved to death. He risked asking for a drink,
making signs to explain his meaning, and the Indian brought him some
water from the lake in a bark cup.

Napoleon Bonaparte (French: Napoléon Bonaparte [napoleɔ̃ bɔnɑpaʁt], Italian: Napoleone Buonaparte; 15 August 1769 – 5 May 1821) was a French military and political leader who rose to prominence during the latter stages of the French Revolution and its associated wars in Europe.
As Napoleon I, he was Emperor of the French from 1804 to 1815, the first monarch of France bearing the title emperor since the reign of Charles the Fat (881-887). His legal reform, the Napoleonic Code, has been a major influence on many civil law jurisdictions worldwide, but he is best remembered for his role in the wars led against France by a series of coalitions, the so-called Napoleonic Wars. He established hegemony over most of continental Europe and sought to spread the ideals of the French Revolution, while consolidating an imperial monarchy which restored aspects of the deposed Ancien Régime. Due to his success in these wars, often against numerically superior enemies, he is generally regarded as one of the greatest military commanders of all time, and his campaigns are studied at military academies worldwide.[1]
Napoleon was born at Ajaccio in Corsica in a family of noble Italian ancestry which had settled Corsica in the 16th century. He trained as an artillery officer in mainland France. He rose to prominence under the French First Republic and led successful campaigns against the First and Second Coalitions arrayed against France. He led a successful invasion of the Italian peninsula.
In 1799, he staged a coup d'état and installed himself as First Consul; five years later the French Senate proclaimed him emperor, following a plebiscite in his favour. He elevated his family to form the Imperial House of France and installed them as rulers of vassal states. In the first decade of the 19th century, the French Empire under Napoleon engaged in a series of conflicts—the Napoleonic Wars—that involved every major European power.[1] After a streak of victories, France secured a dominant position in continental Europe, and Napoleon maintained the French sphere of influence through the formation of extensive alliances and the appointment of friends and family members to rule other European countries as French client states.
The Peninsular War and 1812 French invasion of Russia marked turning points in Napoleon's fortunes. His Grande Armée was badly damaged in the campaign and never fully recovered. In 1813, the Sixth Coalition defeated his forces at Leipzig; the following year the Coalition invaded France, forced Napoleon to abdicate and exiled him to the island of Elba. Less than a year later, he escaped Elba and returned to power, but was defeated at the Battle of Waterloo in June 1815. Napoleon spent the last six years of his life in confinement by the British on the island of Saint Helena. An autopsy concluded he died of stomach cancer, but there has been some debate about the cause of his death, as some scholars have speculated that he was a victim of arsenic poisoning.



Ohrante did not speak to Hugh again that night, or show any further
interest in him. He was left lying bound and was not even given a
blanket. Early in the evening, Ohrante retired alone to the smaller of
the two wigwams, and a little later the others, all except the young
fellow with the malicious grin, crowded into the larger dwelling. The
young Indian, rolled in a dirty blanket, lay down on the opposite side of
the fire from the prisoner.

Hugh’s arms and legs had grown so numb that he no longer felt the galling
of the cords, but he was very sore and uncomfortable from lying on the
hard ground. He had no wish to sleep, he was too eager to find some means
of escape. If he could bring his bonds in contact with a coal from the
fire, he might burn them enough so that he could pull them apart. He
hitched nearer the flickering blaze and turned on his side towards it.
The light was full on the face of the Indian beyond. Hugh could see that
the man’s eyes were open and fixed upon him. His lips were grinning in
the evil fashion the boy knew all too well.

Hugh settled himself as comfortably as he could and closed his eyes.
After what seemed a long time, the deep breathing of the guard seemed to
prove that he slept. The captive opened his eyes and, cautiously and with
painful effort, rolled nearer to the fire. There was a low grunt from the
Indian. He rose, came over to Hugh, seized him by the shoulder and
roughly dragged him back from the fire. Then he passed a skin rope about
the boy’s body under the arms and tied it to a strong young birch. The
rope was long and did not prevent Hugh from lying down and turning from
side to side, but it effectually anchored him too far from the fire to
put his plan into operation. His guard had probably divined his
intention. So ended the captive’s attempt to escape. There was nothing
left for him but to sleep, if he could, and gather strength and courage
for whatever the morrow might bring. It was long before he slept,
however, and the discomfort of his position waked him frequently. At last
the chill of early dawn refused to let him sleep longer.

He had not long to wait before the camp was stirring. The man with the
scarlet head band set about preparing a breakfast of boiled fish. Hugh’s
guard of the night took his gun and went away somewhere. Breakfast was
eaten at sunrise, and this time Hugh’s hands were unbound that he might
feed himself, but he was left tied to the tree. It was some time before
the numbness wore off so that he could use his hands freely. His first
attempts to manage his food amused the Indians, and the boy felt the
blood rise to his cheeks at their grins and unintelligible gibes.

Breakfast was over when the young fellow with the grin returned. He
talked with Ohrante, and afterwards the chief came over to Hugh and began
to ask questions. Again the boy was almost moved to mirth at the contrast
between the giant’s appearance and his voice. As Ohrante went on with his
questioning, however, Hugh almost forgot the ludicrous voice. His replies
kept his wits busy. The Iroquois wanted to know whether Hugh trapped for
himself or traded with others for furs, whether he sold to the Old
Company or to the New, where he intended to winter and other particulars.
Hugh had believed that he had his story well planned, but several of the
questions were unforeseen, and he was obliged to think quickly and invent
as he replied. Telling a false tale was not such a simple matter this
morning, and he was not at all sure that he made his convincing. After
Ohrante turned away, Hugh was left wondering if his answers had allayed
the giant’s suspicions or aroused them.




                                  XXV
                          THE CHIEF OF MINONG


Hugh had expected to learn his fate that morning and had braced himself
for the ordeal, but Ohrante paid no further attention to him. With six of
his band the Iroquois left the camp. From where he sat propped against
the birch trunk, Hugh could see the two canoes start up the bay. His
wrists had been bound again and he was tied to the tree. The squat man
and the ugly fellow with the scarlet head band, who had remained to guard
the captive, evidently considered him so secure that he did not need
close watching. Shortly after the canoe had disappeared, both men went
off somewhere out of sight and hearing.

Now was his chance, thought Hugh, if he could only find some way to loose
his bonds. He pulled and wriggled and twisted, but to no avail. His
captors had done their work too well. His struggles only drew the knots
tighter. He sank back inert and disheartened.

“Take heart.”

The whisper was so low Hugh doubted his ears. He turned his head. Prone
on the ground in the shadow of a willow lay a slim figure, the black head
raised ever so little.

“Blaise!”

The head shook in warning. Wriggling like a snake, Blaise drew close.

“Untie me,” Hugh breathed.

“No, not till night. The guards are too near. When all sleep, I will come
again.”

“That may be too late,” Hugh protested.

“They will do nothing to-day. Ohrante wishes to take you to the mainland,
and to-day the lake is rough. Keep a strong heart, my brother.”

Blaise wriggled back to the shelter of the willows, and was gone without
a sound. He was out of the way none too soon. The guttural voice of the
squat man came to Hugh’s ears. In a few moments both guards were back,
carrying a birch basket of fish.

That day was even longer to Hugh than the preceding one. The sun climbed
and descended so slowly it seemed almost to stand still. Though his
guards left him alone several times, he neither saw nor heard anything
more of Blaise. That did not worry Hugh. He knew that somewhere, not far
away, his younger brother was hiding, awaiting the coming of darkness.
The knowledge put new heart and spirit into the prisoner. If only the
Indians did not capture Blaise, there was a good chance of getting away
safely. Hugh felt sure that he did not need to fear violence from his
captors just yet. Blaise had said that Ohrante meant to carry the
prisoner to the mainland. The lad must have had some good reason for
thinking that. Probably he had overheard the Indians’ conversation. In
this manner the captive, propped against the birch, in the thin shade of
its foliage, speculated on the movements and plans of his captors and his
rescuer. To speculate and plan was all he could do.

About the middle of the afternoon one of the canoes returned with Ohrante
and two of his followers. The men who had remained behind prepared a meal
of the fish they had brought in that morning, boiled in the big kettle.
Hugh was given a portion and his hands were again untied that he might
eat. His pleasure in the fresh lake trout was rather spoiled by its
having been sweetened with maple sugar. He had grown well used to eating
his meat and fish without salt, but he had not learned to enjoy the
Indian custom of using sugar instead.

After the meal, Ohrante again approached the boy. For a few moments the
big man stood looking down at him fixedly and in silence, and Hugh strove
to meet the piercing gaze boldly. Presently the giant began to speak. His
English was bad and interspersed with Indian words, at the meaning of
which Hugh could only guess. His speech, as well as the boy could make it
out, was something like this:

“White man, whether the tale you tell is true or false I know not. When I
look at you I think of a white man I knew and hated and took revenge
upon. Yet you are not like him. Your hair, your eyes are pale. It matters
not. I hate all white men. White men are my enemies. When a white man
falls into my hands I treat him as a great chief should treat his
enemies.” He paused to let the words sink in, his dark face hard as
stone.

The impressiveness and dignity of the chief’s deliberate address were
rather spoiled in effect by his ridiculously weak and broken voice, like
the changing tones of a boy, but Hugh could not fail to perceive the
threat conveyed.

“You are mistaken, great chief,” he replied quietly, using as a bit of
flattery the title Ohrante had given himself. “The white men are not the
enemies of the Indians. They wish the Indians no evil, only good. The
white men know no reason why the peace between themselves and the Ojibwas
should not last forever.”

“Ojibwa!” Ohrante made a gesture of contempt. “The Ojibwa may be a slave
of the white men if he wishes. I, Ohrante,”—he drew himself up a little
straighter, keeping his fierce eyes on the boy’s face to observe what
effect the name had—“I, Ohrante, am no Ojibwa. I was born a Mohawk of the
great six nations. Now I and my braves have taken another name, a name
not for the white man’s ears or lips, the name of the ancient race of
warriors and giants who once lived on Minong, the blood of whose chiefs
flows in my body. We will draw others to us, build up a strong nation,
and drive the white men from all the lands about the great waters.” He
made a sweeping gesture with one long, big-muscled arm.

Hugh could scarcely believe his ears. The giant Indian must be insane to
be the victim of such an illusion of greatness. Hugh knew nothing of any
ancient race upon Minong, although Baptiste had told him that the
Indians, in days gone by, were supposed to have come to the island from
time to time for copper. For all he knew, Ohrante might be a direct
descendant of those old miners, but his speech was none the less absurd.
Its vanity and pomposity were in such violent contrast to the weak, nasal
voice in which it was uttered that the boy forgot his own peril in his
desire to laugh. He controlled himself and for a few moments made no
answer. Ohrante also remained silent. As the two gazed into one another’s
eyes, a daring idea entered the lad’s head. Ohrante’s talk of the ancient
race of warriors and giants recalled the tales told by Baptiste and
Blaise and the trick he and his brother had already played upon the big
Mohawk.

“You speak,” Hugh said, “of the ancient race who once lived on this
island. I have heard that the inhabitants of Minong were not human at
all, but were, and indeed still are, spirits and fiends and frightful
creatures unlike man or beast. Once I laughed at those tales, but now
that I am on Minong, I laugh no more. I myself have seen and heard
strange things on this island. If I were not a good Christian, I should
be sore afraid of this enchanted land. Have you seen or heard aught of
those strange beings, great chief?”

Hugh’s eyes were fastened on Ohrante. When he mentioned the spirits and
fiends he noticed a slight change in the huge man’s face. As the boy went
on, Ohrante’s composure was so far shaken that he drew a quick breath and
one of his big hands clenched with a convulsive movement. Hugh was
pleased with his strategy. He had found the giant’s weak spot. Brave he
might be in contact with his fellow men, but of unearthly beings he was
superstitiously afraid. Hugh feigned not to notice, and in a moment
Ohrante had covered his agitation with a show of indifference.

“No, white man,” he lied proudly, “I have heard nothing and I fear
nothing.” Then he changed the subject. “When the waves go down in the
lake out there, we leave Minong. We go to the place of vengeance, where
Ohrante puts all his prisoners to death. On the Island of Torture both
white men and Ojibwas may find the signs and learn how the Chief of
Minong takes vengeance on his enemies. Prepare for the torture, white
man, for not even your white God can save you.” And turning, the big
chief strode away.

“Yet I think He will save me,” Hugh said to himself, “through my brother
Blaise.”

It was after sundown when the other canoe returned, with the four
remaining members of the band. They brought with them a quantity of moose
meat, the best parts of a young animal. Immediately the kettle was swung
over the fire. The odor of the cooking meat was tempting to Hugh’s
nostrils, but he was not offered any. His captors evidently considered
that he had had sufficient food for that day. The whole band feasted on
moose, and the camp did not become quiet until much later than on the
previous night.

Hugh was left tied to the tree, his wrists and ankles bound. No one took
enough pity on him to throw a blanket over him. This time it was the
squat man who lay down by the fire. He must have been very sure the
prisoner could not get away. Moreover the enormous amount of meat he had
eaten made the man especially drowsy. His loud breathing soon proved that
he was sleeping soundly.

Under the birch tree, beyond the light of the flickering fire, Hugh lay,
tense and anxious. He heard the snores of his guard, and other sounds of
heavy slumbering from the larger wigwam. Why did not Blaise come? Except
the breathing of the sleeping Indians and the low ripple of the water on
the beach, not a sound broke the silence of the night. Every sense on the
alert, Hugh waited through the long minutes. It seemed to him hours must
have passed since the guard lay down by the fire.

What was that rustle in the willows? It was the slightest of sounds, but
his ear caught it. Was it only a rabbit? He felt a touch on the rope that
bound him to the tree, then a sharp jerk. The rope sagged down. Fingers
grasped his shoulder and sent a shiver of excitement through his body. A
hand slipped swiftly down his left arm, something cold touched his
wrists, slipped between them. There was another little jerk, and his arms
were free. His numb hands dropped to the ground, began to tingle. He did
not dare to try to raise himself to a sitting position for fear of making
a noise. Then his ankles fell apart, and he knew that bond had been cut
also. Yet, motionless, he waited for orders.

The hand touched his shoulder again. Lips brushed his ear, as a voice
whispered in the softest of hisses, “Roll over and follow.”

Hugh obeyed unquestioningly. As he rolled over, he realized that the cord
was still attached to his left wrist. There came a gentle pull, and he
understood. Blaise had hold of the cord. This was his method of guiding
his brother. Hugh attempted to crawl forward, but his legs and feet were
so numb he found progress difficult. They dragged like logs. He could not
move them lightly and noiselessly, yet he must go noiselessly to escape.

The cord on his wrist slackened. Blaise had sensed the difficulty. His
shoulder brushed Hugh as he crawled back to the latter’s side. In a
moment he was silently but vigorously rubbing and kneading Hugh’s calves,
ankles and feet. Hot prickles of feeling began to course through the numb
legs. After a few moments of stinging pain, the blood was running
normally again, and the numbness was gone. Still the wigwams remained
silent and the squat Indian by the fire snored on. An Indian in his wild
state is commonly supposed to sleep lightly and wake at the slightest
sound, and so he does if he is where there may be danger, and has not
eaten or drunk too much. The Indian is human, however. A full and hearty
meal, accompanied by a sense of security, can cause him to sleep as
soundly as any well fed white man.




                                  XXVI
                                 ESCAPE


Taking the lead again, Blaise crawled cautiously and silently away from
the vicinity of the fire and the wigwams. Hugh, his legs and feet once
more under control, followed close behind, Blaise still guiding him by
the cord attached to his wrist. The half-breed boy seemed able to glide
like a snake without a sound, but Hugh was less experienced in stealth.
In spite of all his care, the bushes he brushed rustled now and then. The
noises were very slight, but each rustle or creak brought the lad’s heart
into his mouth. Yet the Indian by the fire lay still, and no sound came
from the wigwams.

At last the fugitives were far enough from the camp, and well screened by
trees and bushes, so they dared go upright. Blaise had kept his sense of
direction in the darkness and knew where he wanted to go. Turning to the
right, he led Hugh across level ground and through open growth of birches
and poplars. Then he turned again. A little farther on he paused among
some alders, handed Hugh the cord, uttered a low whisper of caution, and
slipped between the bushes.

Hugh carefully pushed his way through, and stopped still. Before him lay
the lake, the ripples lit by the stars and moon. Glancing along the
narrow strip of sand that separated him from the water, he could make out
a dark shape lying above the reach of the waves. It was an overturned
canoe. Blaise had circled about in the woods and had come back to the
shore. A little way beyond the canoe, back from the beach and hidden from
where Hugh stood by trees and bushes, was the Indian camp. This was a
dangerous manœuvre of his younger brother’s and at first Hugh could see
no reason for it. Why had not Blaise led straight back through the woods
and up the ridge? The bateau, to which they must trust to get clear away,
was on the other side of those ridges. _Was_ the bateau still there or
had the Indians found it?

Blaise was moving swiftly along the beach, and, after hesitating a
moment, Hugh followed. He was relieved to find that the alder bushes
still screened them from the camp. They could launch the canoe without
being visible from the wigwams or from the spot where the fire burned.
The canoe was not one of those he had seen Ohrante’s band using, but a
small craft, barely large enough to hold two men. Silently the boys
turned it over, carried it down the beach and placed it in the lake.
Blaise, standing in the water to his knees, held the boat while Hugh
stepped into the stern. The younger boy took his place in the bow, the
paddles dipped.

Hugh had expected to steer around the inner beach and on up the long bay.
He was astonished when Blaise signalled him to go the other way. This was
indeed a risk. The older boy would have protested, had he dared speak
loud enough to make his brother hear. But they were too near the camp to
chance conversation, whatever foolhardy venture Blaise might be planning.
Moreover Hugh knew that the half-breed lad was far from foolhardy and
must have good reason for what he was doing. The elder brother obeyed the
signal and said nothing.

Crouched as far down in the canoe as they could kneel and still wield
their paddles, the two dipped the blades noiselessly. A few strokes and
they were out of the shelter of the fringe of bushes. They were passing
the camp, where the ground was open from lodges to beach. Fearfully Hugh
glanced in that direction. He could make out the dark bulk of one of the
wigwams and near it the dull glow of the dying fire. His guard lay beside
that fire. If the man should wake and raise his head, he could scarcely
fail to see the passing canoe, a dark, moving shape on the moonlit water.
A vigorous but careful stroke, and both lads held their paddles
motionless while the canoe slipped by of its own momentum. It made no
sound audible above the rippling of the water on the pebbles. The squat
Indian slept on.

A clump of mountain ash, leafy almost to the ground, came between the
canoe and the fire. The paddles dipped again. In a few moments the slight
projection, scarce long enough to be called a point, had been rounded.
The wigwams and the fire were hidden by trees and bushes.

Hugh drew a long breath and put more speed into his strokes. The brothers
were moving down the bay, and he realized now the reason for their
manœuvre. Had they struck through the woods to the ridge, they would
inevitably, in spite of the greatest care and caution, have left a trail.
The canoe left no tracks. When they passed out from the narrowest part of
the channel, they were obliged to put strength and vigor into their
paddling, for they were going almost directly against the fresh wind.
They kept as close to the right hand shore as they dared, and so had some
protection. Vigorous and careful handling were necessary, however, to
make headway in the roughening water.

As they went by one of the shallow curves that could scarcely be called
coves, Blaise uttered a little exclamation and pointed with his paddle to
a black object moving on the water. As Hugh looked, the thing turned a
little, and he could make out, in silhouette, great branching antlers. A
moose was swimming from one shore of the little indentation to the other.

“There is meat to last us a long time,” he muttered regretfully, “if only
we dared risk a shot.”

Blaise laughed softly. “We could not shoot if we wished. Neither has a
gun.”

“True. When you set out to find me, Blaise, why didn’t you bring yours?”

The lad in the bow shrugged slightly. “I could not use it without a
noise, and I wished not to be burdened with it. Let us not talk now.
Voices carry far in the night.”

Hugh heeded the warning. As the bay widened, the force of wind and waves
increased. The lads were paddling northeast, almost in the teeth of the
wind. Hugh began to doubt whether they would be able to round the long
point, or even keep on along it much farther. Blaise had no intention of
rounding the point, however. He had another plan. As they passed the twin
coves, where they had camped while they sought for the cache of furs, he
turned his head ever so slightly and spoke.

“Steer into the crack where we carried out the furs.”

Hugh replied with a word of assent and steered close under the riven rock
wall. The water was slightly sheltered, and the waves were running past
the fissures, not into them. The canoe slipped by the stern of the
wrecked bateau, projecting from the crack into which it had been driven.
The narrow rift was passed. At the wider black gap, Hugh made the turn.
In response to his brother’s quick “Take care,” he held his paddle
steady.

The canoe glided into the gap, slowed down. Before the bottom could grate
on the pebbles, Blaise had warned Hugh to step over the side. The latter
found himself in the water above his knees.

“We must take the canoe well up the crack and hide it,” he said.

“And risk its discovery, which would put Ohrante on our trail? No, lay
your paddle in the bottom. Turn around, but do not let go.”

Hugh did not at first grasp the half-breed lad’s intention, but he
obeyed. When Hugh had turned, Blaise spoke again.

“Push out with all your strength. Now.”

Together they gave the light craft a strong shove and let go. It slid
over the water, out from the mouth of the rift. The wind caught it and it
was borne away in the moonlight.

“The wind will take it up the bay,” the younger boy explained. “It may
stay right side up, it may not. It may be shattered on the rocks or
washed on some beach. Wherever Ohrante finds it, it will be a long way
from here.”

“It will not help him to pick up our trail certainly,” Hugh exclaimed.
“That was a clever thought, Blaise.”

Blaise turned to lead the way up the crack. It was black dark in the
fissure. Patches of moonlit sky could be seen overhead, between the
branches and spreading sprays of the cedars, but no light penetrated to
the bottom. Guiding themselves by their outstretched hands, and feeling
for each step, as they had done on that other night when they had entered
this cleft, the two made their way up. As he thought of that other night,
Hugh put his hand to his breast to feel if the precious packet was still
there, attached to a piece of fish line around his neck. It was luck that
the Indians had merely taken his weapons and had not searched him.

Feeling along the left wall of the gap, Blaise found the slit that led
into the pit where the furs had been concealed, but he did not squeeze
through. He led on up the wider rift. Where the walls were less sheer and
trees grew on the gully bottom, pushing through in the darkness became
increasingly difficult. When the brothers had come that way in daylight,
they had found it troublesome enough. Now exposed roots and undergrowth
snared Hugh’s toes, rocks and tree trunks bruised his shoulders, prickly
evergreen branches scratched his face and caught his clothes. These were
small troubles, however, not to be heeded by a fugitive flying from such
a cruel fate as Ohrante had in mind for him. The boy’s only desire was to
put as great a distance as possible between himself and the giant Mohawk.
Indeed he had to hold himself in restraint to keep from panic flight.

After a few hundred feet of stumbling, groping progress, the two came to
the broken birch, ghostly in the moonlight which shone down into the open
space where the guide tree stood. They paused for a moment. On either
hand and ahead the growth was thick.

“Which way now?” Hugh whispered the words as if he still feared an enemy
lurking near.

“Straight ahead to the top of the high ridge. It will be difficult. I
know not if we can do it in the darkness.”

“We must do it,” said Hugh emphatically.

Blaise nodded. “We will try,” he agreed.

The ground was low here, protected from the lake by the rock ridge with
its rifts and cracks. A few steps beyond the little birch, the lads found
themselves in a veritable tangle of growth, through which but little
light penetrated from the sky. They struggled forward among close
standing, moss-draped, half dead evergreens and old rotten birches, their
feet sinking deep into the soft leaf mould and decayed wood that formed
the soil. Where fallen trees had made an opening that let in a little
light, thickets of bushes and tangles of ground yew had grown up, more
difficult to penetrate than the black woods. Compelled to make their way,
for the most part, by feeling instead of sight, they could go but slowly.
Hugh soon lost all sense of direction, and he wondered whether Blaise
knew where he was going.

Rising ground and a thinning of the woods reassured the white boy. They
must be going up the ridges, not back towards the Indian camp. He
marvelled that Blaise had managed to find the way. Blaise was far from
infallible though, and there soon came a time when he did not think it
wise to go farther. They had climbed a steeper slope, treading firmer
soil and outcroppings of rock, but still in thick woods, and had reached
a small rock opening overgrown with moss and low plants. The sweet
perfume of the carpet of twin flowers he could not see came to Hugh’s
nostrils. Blaise stopped and peered about him. Clouds must have covered
the moon, for the open space was very dark.

“We had best wait here,” he said after a few moments. “If the moon shines
again, or after dawn comes, I will climb a tree and see where we are.”

“Don’t you know where you are?” Hugh asked.

“I am not certain. How can I be certain in the darkness, when I have
never come this way before? I think our way lies over there.” He pointed
across the opening. “We are on the top of a low ridge, but if we go down
where the trees stand thick, we may lose our way and much time also. We
are well hidden here. When Ohrante wakes, he will not know which way to
seek. It will be long before he finds our trail.”

“I hate to stop as long as we can go on.”

“I too, my brother, but I think we shall gain time, not lose it if we
wait for light.”




                                 XXVII
                         WHAT BLAISE OVERHEARD


Far from the Indian camp and well hidden, the brothers could risk
conversation. Instinctively they kept their voices low. Hugh was curious
to learn how Blaise had crossed from the pond in the small island to the
long point, and Blaise equally eager to hear how Hugh had fallen into
Ohrante’s hands. Seated on moss patches in the rock opening, they
satisfied each other’s curiosity on those points. Then Blaise went on to
tell how he had tracked his elder brother. When he had smelled smoke he
had known he must be near a camp.

“I heard the rippling of water,” the boy said in his soft singsong. “Then
I caught the sound of men’s voices. I left the trail and crept towards
the water. I peeped through the alders and saw the lake and the beach.
Canoes lay on the pebbles, but no man was in sight. I wished to find out
if you were in the camp. So I went back into the woods and crawled
towards the voices. I crept from tree to tree and bush to bush, and found
myself behind a wigwam. I lay flat and tried to peep around it, but a
clump of willows was in the way, and I could see nothing. I crawled like
a snake for the willows. I looked through them and saw you, my brother,
bound to the birch. My heart gave a leap when I saw you unharmed and knew
there was yet time to steal you away. I saw Ohrante too. He sat by the
fire and ate. He turned his head, and I feared his sharp eyes might find
me through the willows, so I crept away. I went back into the woods and
hid not far from the trail. The Iroquois I had seen on the trail
returned. Crawling nearer the camp again, I heard him talk to Ohrante,
but I could not understand, for he spoke the Iroquois language. I saw no
way to get you away before nightfall, and I feared they might carry you
off somewhere in a canoe where I could not follow.

“Back to the beach I went and hid myself in the alders near the big
canoes. I saw Ohrante and six others go away. By their moccasins I knew
that two were Iroquois, the others Ojibwas and Crees. A small canoe was
left on the beach. When Ohrante had been gone a while, I heard voices,
and two more men came along the shore from the camp. One carried a net of
cedar cord. He had an ugly face and a red band around his head. The
other, a short, strong man, I knew at once. He is Monga, an Ojibwa, one
of the two who helped Ohrante to escape. The two sat down on the sand
just below where I was hidden, and I crawled nearer to listen to what
they said as they mended their net. They spoke Ojibwa. Red Band has not
been with Ohrante long. He asked what the chief would do with the white
captive. Monga,—his name means the _loon_,—answered that Ohrante would
take the white man to the mainland, to the Isle of Torture, but they
could not start to-day because the wind was too strong and the lake too
rough. Red Band was not pleased. He said he wished the chief would let
the white men alone until his people were stronger. Monga said that
Ohrante hated all white men. When the trader Beaupré escaped his
vengeance——”

“What?” interrupted Hugh. “He said ‘the trader Beaupré’?”

“Yes. When the trader Beaupré escaped Ohrante’s vengeance, the chief
swore to kill every white man who fell into his hands.”

“But what did he mean by father’s escaping Ohrante’s vengeance?”

“It was as we thought,” Blaise replied, his voice low and tense. “It was
Ohrante who brought our father to his death. Red Band said it was true
that Beaupré escaped, but in his escape he received his death wound.”

“That explains what we found at the Devil Track River.”

“Yes. From what they said it seems that our father and Black Thunder both
fell into Ohrante’s hands. In some way they escaped, but they were
overtaken at the River of Devil Tracks. They fought and our father got
away again, but sorely wounded. That is the way I put together the things
I heard the two men say.”

“How comes it then that the bateau and furs are here on Isle Royale? Did
Ohrante bring them here?”

“I think Ohrante knows nothing of the furs. When we first saw him here I
thought he had come to Minong to seek the furs, but no, this is not the
first time he has been here. His braves call him ‘Chief of Minong.’ I
think he fled here, he and Monga and the other man who helped him, when
he escaped from our father and the Ojibwas. I know not when the rest of
the band joined him, but I believe Ohrante and those two were living
somewhere on this island when white men and red sought them and could not
find them. This I know, here on Minong Ohrante captured our father and
Black Thunder. Monga said it was strange that two white men had been
found here, where no man was believed to come. Both Jean Beaupré and the
new white captive pretended to be only traders, he said, and told tales
of how they were driven here by storm and wrecked on the rocks. The chief
believed Beaupré’s story, but now that this other white man came with the
same tale, Ohrante began to doubt. He thought perhaps they came to spy on
him.”

“I feared Ohrante did not believe me,” Hugh confessed, “but it made
little difference what story I told. He says he hates all white men and
intends to destroy them and drive them out of this country. He thinks he
is destined to be some sort of king over this part of the world. Did
those two say more of father?”

“No, their net was finished and they went out in the little canoe. At
once I sought you, my brother, but I dared not cut your bonds. The two
were only a little way out in the bay. Later I listened to them talk
again. I could not get the meaning of all they said, but I think Ohrante
intends to hold a council on that island where he tortures his prisoners.
I am sure that others are to meet him there to join his band.”

“And he was reserving me to be put to death by torture as a sort of
entertainment for his new adherents, I suppose,” Hugh muttered grimly.
“That is not the part in the performance I should choose to play. Perhaps
I can find some other part more to my liking.” A daring suggestion had
come into his mind as Blaise told of the council on the “Island of
Torture.” “Did you learn when the meeting was to be?” Hugh asked
abruptly.

“It is to be soon, I think. They wait only for safe weather to make the
crossing.”

Hugh was silent in frowning thought. When he spoke, it was not of the
council. “It is plain to see what happened,” he said musingly. “The storm
bore father and his comrade here to this island. Their boat was driven
into that crack in the rocks and wrecked. Ohrante came upon them, took
them captive and carried them to the mainland. Father must have had some
warning, though, for he hid the pelts and the packet. I wonder, Blaise,
if, when he was first wrecked, he put the furs up on that rock shelf to
keep them dry and safe. Then, afterwards, when he learned Ohrante was
near, he moved the bales to a more secret spot farther from the wreck.”

Blaise nodded. “It may be,” was all he said.

“We were right all the time,” Hugh added, “in believing that Ohrante had
something to do with father’s death.”

“I felt in my heart that Ohrante was the guilty one,” the younger lad
replied simply.

“Yet of course it may not have been Ohrante himself who gave father his
death blow,” Hugh mused.

Blaise waved away his brother’s reasoning with a gesture. “It matters not
whether Ohrante himself or one of his men struck the blow. It is not the
knife that we punish when a murder is committed, but the man who wields
the knife. Ohrante is that man. It was he who captured our father, who
would have put him to the torture, who caused his death.”

“And Ohrante shall pay for it,” Hugh broke in passionately. “He shall pay
soon if we can but reach the mainland in time. The sky is lighter,
Blaise,” he added, looking up above the surrounding tree tops. “We must
be moving.”




                                 XXVIII
                          CONFUSING THE TRAIL


Looking around for a tall tree, Blaise found a tapering spruce, growing
in a pocket of deeper soil and towering above its fellows. The stubs of
the lower branches, that, deprived of light by adjacent trees, had died
and fallen off, formed a ladder, up which he climbed, Hugh not far
behind. Reaching the live limbs, they pushed their way among the thick
masses of dark green needles. The smaller lad went on until the slender
spire bent threateningly under his weight.

The moon had come out from behind the clouds, and the paling sky foretold
the dawn. From his perch above the surrounding trees, Blaise could see
the water, and, across it, the narrow black line of the low point. On the
other side, directly below him, he could make out from the growth that
the ground dipped down. Beyond the slight dip, the rising ranks of trees
betrayed the steepness of the ascent. A little to his right and far up,
his keen eyes detected a bare stretch of rock between the masses of
foliage above and below. He took a long look in every direction, then
started to climb down.

Hugh, learning from the movement of the branches above him that Blaise
was descending, also moved farther down. There, resting on a stout limb,
he waited for his brother.

“What did you make out?” he asked eagerly. “I could see that we are part
way up the ridges. Have we kept a straight course?”

“Yes, we have come straighter than I feared, but we are scarce more than
half-way up, and we must go farther to the left. You remember that bare
cliff?”

“The wall, like a fortification, that we saw from across the bay?”

“The same. We cannot climb that place. We must go to the left to avoid
it. Come, we must make haste.”

Darkness still lay deep in the woods, as the two plunged down the short
slope into a narrow and shallow gully. Through the thicker growth at the
bottom, they threaded their way to the left a hundred yards or more, then
began to ascend again. The rapidly rising ground, interrupted by shallow
depressions only, served as a guide. Where the slope was regular and not
too steep and there was soil enough to anchor them, trees grew thick, but
abrupt bare places, masses of tumbled rocks and almost vertical walls
made up much of the way. The northwestern side of the long point was far
more abrupt than the southeastern, but the increasing light made it
possible for the boys to choose their path. They were no longer compelled
to proceed by sense of feeling only. Sound of wind, active of limb, and
goaded on by the signs of breaking day, they climbed swiftly and without
pause.

Crossing a narrow shelf of broken rock débris, that had crumbled into
soil deep enough to bear trees, they came to the last rise. By going
farther to the left, they had thought to avoid the bare, pillared, rock
ramparts, and had indeed escaped the steepest and highest stretch.
Nevertheless the cliff before them was almost vertical, and clothed with
only an occasional sturdy, dwarfed mass of cedar or trailing juniper, a
little seedling tree, stunted bush or tiny plant, growing in crevice or
hollow, and the ever present, tight clinging moss and lichens. Had the
ancient rock not been ribbed and blocked and weathered, it would have
been unclimbable. The splitting off of blocks and scaling away of flakes,
which had crumbled into débris at the foot of the cliff, had left shelves
and crannies affording some foothold and finger-hold to the active
climber.

It was a bad place to go up but not an impossible one. The fugitives
paused only long enough to select what appeared to be a possible route up
a sort of flue, caused by the falling out of one of the pillars. Blaise
went first, and Hugh would have followed close behind, had not the
half-breed boy bade him, somewhat sharply, wait below. If Blaise lost his
hold and slipped back, it would not advantage him any to take his elder
brother down with him. The lad was nearing the top when he let his weight
rest too heavily on an insecure ledge. The rock flaked off, and he was
left hanging, one hand thrust into a crack, the other clinging to a cedar
stem. Down below, Hugh held his breath in suspense. For the interval of
an instant, while the agile climber drew up his left foot and thrust his
toes into a cranny, the cedar held. Then its roots pulled loose. But
Blaise managed to keep his balance, and quickly hooked his strong fingers
around the rim of the hole where the cedar clump had been growing. In a
few moments he was over the top, and it was Hugh’s turn to make the
ascent.

The scaling away of the piece of rock that had formed the narrow ledge
made it necessary for Hugh to take a slightly different route up the
flue. He was heavier than Blaise and for him the climb was even more
perilous. Profiting by his younger brother’s experience, Hugh trusted to
crannies and cracks into which he could thrust his fingers and toes,
rather than to the more treacherous projections. Climbing cautiously, he
reached the summit without accident.

The growth on the ridge top prevented the boys from seeing to the east,
but the sky was now so light they knew sunrise could not be far away.
Hurrying across the summit, they came out upon the southeastern slope.
From there they could see the rose pink flush of day.

The southeastern side of the high ridge was far less abrupt than the
northwestern. Except for occasional open rock stretches, it was, however,
thickly forested. In spite of the rough going, the fugitives made good
speed on the down grade. Nimbly the light-footed Blaise threaded his way
among trees and undergrowth, and sprang down the open slopes. Hugh, to
whose feet the very thought of the cruel Iroquois seemed to give wings,
kept close behind. In a shorter time than they would have believed
possible, they were at the edge of the water.

Blaise glanced towards the woods across the channel. “That is not the
island where the little lake is,” he said. “We are too far down. The
bateau is over that way.” Without waiting for Hugh to reply, the lad
turned to the right and began to make his way along shore.

A moment later, Hugh, following closely, said anxiously, “We are leaving
a plain trail here. The ground is damp and there is much undergrowth.”

“We cannot help that. If we must leave a trail, we will use it to lead
our enemies astray, Step as lightly as you can, and in a little while I
will show you a trick.” Hugh had been possessed with the fear that some
of Ohrante’s men might have discovered the boat and taken it away. He was
greatly relieved to find it tied to the overhanging tree where he had
left it.

“Take the bateau,” the younger boy ordered, “and paddle down to the place
where we came out of the woods. I will join you there.”

“What are you going to do?”

“Lead our enemies astray. If they find my tracks near their camp and
follow them, they may also find the trail down to this place. They must
not think that we crossed the water from here. I shall make tracks, plain
tracks, from here down towards the mouth of the bay, beyond the place
where you and I came out of the woods a little while ago.”

“But in our old trail from here to the ridge top the footprints point up,
not down.”

“Yes, and we have not time to go back and make new. I hope they will
think we travelled both ways on that trail. I will go back a little way
and make a few prints leading down.”

While Hugh was untying and pushing off the bateau, Blaise, going
carefully and lightly, followed for a little way the route he had taken
when he went in search of his white brother. Then, turning, he came back,
leaving here and there clear impressions to show direction. Twenty or
thirty feet from the shore, he branched off to the left, making tracks
leading to the alongshore trail, but avoiding the spot where the bateau
lay. He then went on towards the mouth of the bay, carefully obliterating
all toe marks that pointed up the channel, and making sure to leave some
pointing down.

In the meantime Hugh had pushed off the bateau. He noticed that the boat
had left no clear traces, except where the rope had rubbed the bark from
the limb around which it had been tied. That scar might easily have been
made by the claws of some animal climbing out over the water. To make
such an origin seem more likely, he scratched the scar lengthwise several
times with his thumb nail. As he paddled along close to shore, he came
upon the tree Blaise had crossed on, and pushed it out into mid channel.

About a hundred feet below the place where they had come out of the
woods, Hugh joined Blaise. Here they took pains to leave distinct signs
that a boat had been pulled up on shore. They wished their pursuers to
see that they had taken to the water at this spot. Their intention was to
lead Ohrante, should he find their trail, away from the island where the
furs were hidden.

“Wouldn’t it be possible, Blaise,” Hugh questioned, “to load the furs and
start across the lake at once? If the wind is right, I am willing to risk
Ohrante’s seeing us and giving chase. With a good breeze we can
outdistance his canoes.”

Blaise shook his head. “We could not run away from him in this wind. Last
night it was nearly northeast, but now it is northwest. Surely you
noticed that when we were on the ridge top. We cannot make speed with
this heavy bateau against the wind. Yet it is not too strong for canoes
to go against it, if the men at the paddles have skill. No, we must wait
till the wind changes or till darkness comes again. Now we will carry our
false trail farther.”

Blaise steered the boat straight across the channel to the outer end of
the opposite island. Between steep, high, bare masses of detached rock
and the small island itself, a reef extended, the inner end rising out of
the water to form a beach of boulders and pebbles. The boys ran the
bateau on the pebbles and jumped out. They could see off across the open
water to the east, where the sun was already above the horizon.

“Here,” said Blaise, “we will leave the ashes of a fire, as if we had
stopped to cook a meal. Make haste and get wood.”

Hugh did not need to be warned to make haste. A small fire was soon
kindled on the pebbles where it could not spread, then partly stamped out
and left smouldering. As the boys embarked again, Hugh glanced back to
satisfy himself that the wind was not carrying any sparks towards the
woods. Heretofore he had always drenched his cooking fire before leaving
camp, but to have poured water on this one would have defeated his
younger brother’s purpose. Blaise wanted the recent kindling of the fire
to be in plain evidence.

“Where we have gone from here our enemies cannot tell,” he explained.
“They will find no tracks or signs on this little island except around
the fire. Then they will be sure we have gone by boat, but which way they
will not know.”

“Which way shall we go?” Hugh questioned.

“Back to our camp in the little inland lake, but not down the channel
next the point. We will steer around these big rocks and up the other
side of this island.”

The two paddled the bateau around the rocks and up along the southeastern
side of the small island. High in the center and heavily wooded, it hid
them completely. Their route led them into the open end of the narrow
strait that cut into the other island where the furs were hidden. They
passed the gap with its two tiny islets, where heretofore they had gone
in and out, and were soon back in the little pond.

“I don’t know whether we are wise to stay here,” Hugh said thoughtfully,
as they drew the boat up on the narrow beach. “We have tried to confuse
our trail, yet if Ohrante tracks us across the high ridge and down to the
water, he will surely search all these islands. This is almost too
perfect a hiding place. If those Indians are familiar with this ‘Bay of
Spirits’ they will think of this place at once. Then we shall be caught
like rats in a trap.”

“You are right to call this the ‘Bay of Spirits,’” Blaise replied. “By
that name Monga and Red Band spoke of it. But I think they have never
been here but that one time. From what they said I think they have always
made their camps on the part of Minong that lies the other side of the
high ridge. And now both Monga and Red Band have great fear of this bay.”

Hugh chuckled. “So has the mighty chief Ohrante. I saw his fear in his
face when I spoke of hearing strange noises. I am wondering, though, if
he should track us here, if he will not suspect a trick.”

“Something more than the voices has frightened them,” Blaise went on.
“The second time I listened to those two, Monga told Red Band of huge
giants at the end of the point.”

“Giants? Did he mean those pillars of rock?”

“No, the giants were alive and moved.”

“Some old superstition, Blaise.”

“Monga said he saw the giants, Hugh, he and others of the band.”

“We spent nearly a day on that point and we saw no giants. If Monga saw
anything there it must have been you and me. I don’t understand how those
fellows in that canoe could have missed seeing us. Blaise,”—a sudden
light of understanding dawned in Hugh’s face,—“Blaise, do you remember
how hot and still it was, and how the haze shimmered on the water? And do
you recall the day we crossed to the Isle Royale, the very same sort of
day? We saw the mirage, high mountains towering up where later we found
there were no real mountains. Do you remember too when we left the Bay of
the Beaver, how we saw coming towards us through the morning mist, what
we thought was a ship, so tall it looked, but when it drew nearer it
shrank to a mere sailboat?”

“I remember those things.” Blaise was staring at Hugh’s excited face.

“Don’t you understand then? Don’t you see how it was that Monga and those
others in that canoe saw giants on the end of the point? On that hot,
still day, as they came across the water and looked through the shimmer
of the heat haze, they saw us there on the open rocks. We ourselves saw
that island far out greater than it really was and distorted. Do you
remember how it shrank afterwards? To those men in that canoe we too were
distorted and loomed up huge and tall like giants. That was what
frightened them. That explains their hasty flight. We were the giants on
the end of the point!”

Blaise was still staring, but his look of puzzlement had given way to one
almost of awe. “It may be as you say,” he replied slowly. “Monga thought
it was Kepoochikan and Nanibozho. I cannot understand it at all, that
enchantment you call mirage that makes men see mountains that are not
there and turns bateaus into ships and men into giants.”

“I don’t understand it either,” Hugh admitted, “and neither did the
captain of the _Athabasca_. He said it was just one of the secrets of
nature that we don’t understand yet. Surely the mirage is nothing to
fear. It has stood us in good stead by frightening away Ohrante’s men and
causing them to stand in terror of this bay. No wonder we scared them
away with the echoes. They must have been frightened when they came in
here. If only their fear is strong enough to keep them away now, we are
safe. But we dare not trust too much to that. We must hide ourselves as
well as we can. The entrance to this little lake is narrow and I think I
see a way to block it so it will look as if no boat could have gone
through. First, though, let us eat something if there is anything left.”

“There is a little corn, if no animal has stolen it,” Blaise replied. “I
too am sore hungry, for I have eaten nothing but a few green bearberries
since I set out in search of you.”




                                  XXIX
                           THE CEDAR BARRIER


The corn, in its bark wrapping, was found untouched, hanging from the
birch where Blaise had left it. Not daring to kindle a fire for fear the
smoke might betray them, Hugh put the dry, hulled kernels in the kettle
with cold water to soften them. Then he spoke again of his plan to block
the entrance to the pond.

“That cedar that leans far down over the water,” he explained, “looks as
if it was almost ready to fall of its own weight. If we could pull or
push it down, it would go clear across that narrow channel.”

“But then we could not take our bateau through.”

“Oh, we can easily chop out a section when we are ready to go.”

“If anyone is near he will hear the sound of the axe.”

“It is better to risk that, Blaise, than to leave the entrance open. We
will go look at the tree and see what we can do.”

The leaning, top-heavy cedar had tipped so far that several of its roots
had pulled loose from their anchorage, bringing with them a section of
the shallow soil and exposing the rock below. On one side the roots still
held, supplying enough nourishment to the limbs to keep part of them
alive. Some of the thick sprays of foliage were brown and dead, but many
were still green and flourishing. The tree certainly looked as if the
slightest additional strain would tip it the rest of the way. Before
testing it, the boys noted where it would fall. It stood a few feet above
the water and slanted out at an angle across the passageway.

“It will not catch in any tree when it goes down,” Hugh observed. “Fresh
breaks in other trees or bushes would betray how recently it had fallen.
Of course the fact that it is partly green will prove it hasn’t been down
very long.”

“An uprooted tree lying in the water will stay green for many days,”
Blaise replied.

“I think we had better try to push it over,” Hugh decided. “To make a way
out to-night we shall not need to chop through the trunk. This end will
be high enough from the water so, by cutting off a few of the lower
limbs, we can take the boat underneath.”

“If the water is deep enough at this side,” added Blaise.

First attempts to bring down the slanting tree failed, however. It was
not so insecure as it appeared. The tough roots that still held were
stronger anchors than the boys had suspected. Pushing and pulling with
all their might had little effect.

“We must cut away some of the roots that are holding,” Hugh said at last.
“Lend me your hatchet, Blaise. Ohrante has mine.”

The roots were tough, but the little axe was sharp and Hugh’s blows
vigorous. He cut every root he could reach, and the tree trembled, swayed
and tipped, pulling up more rootlets and chunks of soil.

“It will come now. It needs just a little more weight. Here, Blaise.”

Hugh returned the hatchet, jumped upon the leaning trunk and made his way
along it. The tree swayed with the added weight. As he went farther up
and out, the strain on the few roots was too great. With a rending sound
they tore up the shallow soil, and the cedar crashed down across the
channel.

Hugh had expected the tree to go suddenly, and he kept a firm hold, but
he was jarred and drenched in the splash. The trunk, where he was
clinging, did not go under water, and he scrambled quickly back to shore.
All the roots were in the air now, and the tree slanted down from the
butt, instead of up. The crown rested in the shallow water and against
the opposite shore. The entrance to the little pond was both well closed
and effectually concealed.

Hugh uttered a little exclamation of satisfaction. “It must look from out
there,” he said, nodding towards the water beyond, “like a perfectly
natural accident. This old cedar is the best of screens. I don’t believe
anyone coming around that little island and seeing this fallen tree would
guess there was a lake or bay in here. Of course if he came so close he
could peep through the branches, he might be able to see water beyond,
but he would never guess that a boat could go in. If anyone came up here,
though, he would see the freshly upturned earth and the cut ends of the
tree roots. But the bushes hide this spot from the water and there is
nothing to bring anyone ashore here. We shall be better hidden than we
could have hoped.”

“Yes, it was a good thought, my brother. We will go back now and bring
the bateau around to this side of the little lake. Then if anyone looks
through the branches and sees the water beyond, he cannot see the bateau
or us. If he tries to cut a way through, we shall hear him and be warned.
The sun climbs high. We must make haste.”

Without pausing to reply, Hugh led off at once, back to the beach and
around to the spot where the boat lay. Quickly and carefully, the
brothers erased all signs of their camp that might be seen from across
the pond. Hugh gathered up the remains of the fire and was about to throw
them into the water, when Blaise stopped him. The charred sticks might
float across, and betray that someone had camped there. So Hugh carried
the blackened bits back into the woods, and then washed every trace of
ashes from the pebbles and sand. The mast and sail, which had been left
on shore, were laid in the boat, and the lads paddled around to a spot
less than a hundred feet from the end of the blockaded passageway. With
the poplar rollers they had used before, they drew the bateau up on
shore, where it could not be seen by anyone peeping through the barrier.

The sun would soon be directly overhead. Ohrante had had several hours to
find Hugh’s trail. The boy did not believe that the Iroquois would let
him escape without some effort to trace and recapture him. Even now the
Chief of Minong or some of his followers might be near at hand. It would
be wise to lie low and keep very quiet, restricting conversation to
necessary whispers. After chewing, as well as he could, some of the
partly softened corn, Hugh stretched himself out on the narrow beach to
let the sun dry his clothes.

Waiting quietly for Ohrante to come and find him proved nerve wracking.
After what seemed a long period of inaction, he raised himself on his
elbow and hitched nearer his younger brother. The latter was sitting
close to the bateau, his eyes closed, apparently asleep.

“Blaise, I’m going up through the woods to find some spot where I can see
out. Then if anyone comes near our barrier I shall know it.”

The half-breed boy had opened his eyes at the first word. “We must take
great care,” he replied in the softest of whispers. “The cracking of a
twig, the moving of a bush may betray us. Yet I am ready to take the risk
if you are.”

“We’ll both go then, and we’ll not take more risk than we can help.”

Blaise nodded and rose. Slipping into the woods just beyond where the
boat lay, he threaded his way among trees and bushes. Hugh followed quite
as cautiously. It was but a short distance, and after a few steps Blaise
dropped to his hands and knees. Hugh followed his example, and remained
motionless while the other crept ahead and disappeared behind a clump of
balsams.

The older boy waited several minutes, then ventured forward. Beyond the
balsams he paused, but could catch no glimpse of Blaise among the dense
growth. The sunlight between the trees ahead showed him that he must be
close to the margin of the woods. Lying almost flat, he wriggled along
until he could see a patch of water. For a moment he lay still, looking
and listening. Then he crept forward again and took his station behind a
thick mass of cedar needles. In its youth this cedar had been bent almost
double by some weight, a fallen tree probably, and had grown in that
misshapen form, branching and leafing out in dense sprays clear to the
ground. Peeping around the green screen, Hugh found he was but a few feet
from the edge of the water. The sheltered bay was without a ripple, the
sun hot, the woods still, the silence unbroken by even the twitter of a
bird or the hum of an insect.

The boy was about to raise himself for a better view, when, from the
water, a sound came to his ears. The very slightest of sounds it was, but
he lowered his head instantly. He wriggled a little farther back behind
the cedar masses and lay motionless. The sound came again, the slightest
suggestion of rippling water. But the bay was smooth and still. What he
heard was the dipping of a paddle blade, the ripple of water against the
side of a boat.

For a few moments Hugh dared not try to look. Then curiosity got the
better of fear. Raising his head ever so little, he found a peep-hole
between the cedar sprays and put his eye to it. He could see a bit of the
round, wooded islet, a section of the shore opposite and, on the water
between, a birch canoe. It held three men. The bow-man was the tall young
Iroquois who had first taken Hugh prisoner. The man in the middle wore a
red band about his long black hair. As the canoe came nearer, Hugh could
see that the steersman was the squat Ojibwa from whose custody he had
escaped. Ohrante had not killed the guard then, but no doubt some heavy
punishment hung over Monga’s head if he did not find Hugh and bring him
back. He was desperate enough to dare return to the dreaded Bay of
Manitos.

The canoe came slowly, the man in the bow watching the water. It was
shallow between the round islet and the blocked entrance to the little
pond. Would the fallen cedar deceive the Indians or not? Hugh held his
breath.

The bow-man straightened a little, glanced towards the cedar, then looked
back at the water again. Red Band’s eyes were on his paddle. Monga’s head
turned from side to side, as he scanned the shore and the woods for any
sign that the fugitive had been there. His glance swept the barrier. He
twisted his paddle. The canoe swerved nearer to the blocked passage.

The man in the bow uttered a sharp hiss of warning. For an instant Hugh
feared that the fellow had caught sight of him through the leafy screen.
But the warning was of shallows ahead. The steersman dipped his paddle
and swerved the canoe again, this time away from the fallen cedar. He did
not cast another glance in that direction, as the canoe came on past the
barrier. The “tide,” as Hugh had called it, was out. The water was at its
lowest point of fluctuation. No one could suspect a navigable channel
where the uprooted tree lay.

It was plain that the Indians intended to round the little islet. To do
so they must pass close to the shore where Hugh was. He lowered his head
cautiously and lay prone and motionless. He could hear the gentle ripple
of the water as the canoe slipped through it. Then a harsh voice spoke.
So close it seemed that the lad almost jumped, and a shudder of fear
passed through him. In an instant he realized that the voice was Monga’s
and that it came from the water, not from the land. The tall fellow
answered briefly, and Monga grunted an abrupt rejoinder. What they said
Hugh could not guess, for they spoke in Ojibwa.

The slight sounds of dipping paddles and rippling water grew fainter and
fainter, then ceased. Hugh drew a long breath, raised his head a little
and looked through the peep-hole. The canoe was no longer in sight. It
could not be far away, though, so he lay still. He was just wondering
whether it would be safe now to try for another and wider view of the bay
and strait, and had raised his head to reconnoiter, when he caught sight
of a crouching figure slipping swiftly between the trees towards him. For
an instant his heart seemed to stop beating, then he saw that it was
Blaise approaching.

The younger brother dropped down beside the elder. “They are gone,” he
whispered. “Let us go back.”




                                  XXX
                         THE FLIGHT FROM MINONG


The canoe had gone by, but the boys did not abate their caution and
watchfulness one whit, as they made their way back to the shore of the
pond.

“That danger seems to be over,” Hugh remarked, his voice still lowered to
a whisper, as he came out of the woods near the boat. “Blaise, could you
understand what those two said? Were you near enough to hear?”

“I was but a little way beyond you, my brother. I heard every word. There
is bad blood between Monga and the young Iroquois. It was the Iroquois
who wished to come up this way. They found the ashes of our fire at the
end of that island out there. Monga thinks we went on across the mouth of
this long bay. He wished to seek us in that direction, but when the
Iroquois found the passage between these islands, he forced Monga to come
up here first. He is sure now that we are not in here. So they go the way
Monga wishes.”

“Then we are safe from those three for some hours at least, but I wish we
knew where Ohrante and the others are.”

“Ohrante must hold Monga, and perhaps the Iroquois, to blame for your
escape. If they take you not back, it will go hard with them. It may be
that Ohrante has sent them to seek you and himself waits at the camp, or
he may search in the other direction. Perhaps he will not come into this
Bay of Manitos at all.”

“Very likely he is glad of an excuse to stay out,” returned Hugh with a
grin. “Ohrante may be brave as a lion with other men, but I think he is
not quite so bold with spirits.”

“No man is,” Blaise replied simply. “I am not sure that Ohrante is very
brave. He is cruel and treacherous, but brave in the way our father was?
No, I think he is not brave like that.” The lad gave one of his
characteristic French shrugs.

Hugh made no answer. He discounted his brother’s opinion of Ohrante
somewhat. Blaise was half Ojibwa, of the Algonquin stock, and the ancient
hatred between Algonquin and Iroquois had not died out and probably never
would die. The boy was naturally unwilling to admit any good qualities in
the self-styled “Chief of Minong,” half Mohawk by blood and wholly so by
training. But Ohrante, thought Hugh, must have some unusual qualities,
since, in spite of the ancient hate, he had attracted to his band Ojibwas
as well as Iroquois.

“Yet, we know not,” Blaise went on after a moment, “how near the others
may be, or how soon Monga may return this way. We dare not venture out
until darkness comes.”

Sunset came at last and twilight. The last morsels of the maple sugar and
the soaked corn made up the evening meal. Blaise slipped through the
woods once more, and reported the outer bay and strait empty of all life
except a pair of fish ducks. Then he and Hugh pushed off the bateau and
crossed the pond. No more peaceful spot could be imagined. The still
water reflected the motionless trees and the soft colors of the sky. From
the woods came the clear, plaintive notes of a thrush.

Landing, the lads went directly to the old birch, and were relieved to
find no signs that anyone had been near it. Blaise climbed the tree and
let himself down into the hole. Hugh then followed him up, received the
bales the younger boy handed him and lowered them to the ground.
Squirrels or wood-mice had nibbled the outer wrappings, but had not
penetrated to the pelts. When all the packages were out of the tree, the
two carried them to the shore and stowed them in the boat. Once more they
paddled across the lake and took the sail aboard. They did not set up the
mast, as they wished to push the boat under the fallen cedar. Beaching
the bateau close to the end of the barrier, they set to work to cut a way
through.

They had only the one little axe, and Hugh wielded that, climbing out on
the tree to reach the limbs he wished to cut. Blaise, standing in the
shallow water, trimmed off smaller branches with his stout knife. Working
with skill and speed, they soon had the lower limbs cleared away from the
under side of the trunk. There appeared to be room enough to push the
bateau through, but the water at that spot was very shallow. The boat
grounded on the rock bottom. The lads unloaded most of the furs, and
succeeded in dragging the lightened bateau over the shallows. Then they
had to carry the bales through the woods, and reload. All this work they
were forced to do as quietly as possible. The blows of the axe could not
be muffled, but the two made no noise they could avoid. They did not dare
light a torch, but the sky was clear and the northern twilight long.
Darkness had settled down, however, by the time they were ready to leave
their island of refuge.

In that sheltered place, they were unable to tell whether there was
breeze enough to aid or hinder them, but they had made up their minds to
leave the Bay of Spirits. If possible they would start for the mainland,
by sail if they could, by paddle if they must. If the wind was so strong
against them that they could not cross, they would go on in the other
direction, and find some temporary hiding place farther from the camp of
the Chief of Minong.

Straight out through the quiet water of the narrower channel, shadowed by
the black, wooded masses of the islands to right and left, they paddled.
Darkness and still water made the shallows treacherous, but they had
noted the channel on their way in that morning, and made their way out
again without accident.

Suddenly Blaise in the bow gave a quick, low hiss. Hugh knew that the
alarmed warning meant, not mere shallow water ahead, but some graver
danger. He obeyed the signal and steered into the deep shadow of the
island close by. The boat scraped the rocks and came to a stop. Looking
out from the protecting gloom, across the moonlit lake, Hugh caught sight
of the cause of his brother’s alarm. A canoe, paddled swiftly, was
crossing the open water beyond the islands, going north. Would it turn up
the bay? Hugh sat motionless, his paddle handle gripped tightly. Then he
drew a breath of relief. The canoe had not turned. It went straight on
and disappeared from sight.

Hugh moved forward to speak to Blaise. “The fellows who were after us,”
he whispered, “going back to camp. They have given up the chase.”

“I could make out but two men,” Blaise replied.

“You couldn’t be certain there weren’t three,” Hugh argued, “unless you
can see much better at night than I can.”

Blaise shook his head doubtfully. “The canoe was headed for the long
point. They must be some of Ohrante’s men.”

“None of them was big enough to be Ohrante himself. We could see them
well enough to make sure of that.”

The brothers waited in the shadow for several minutes, then ventured on.
As they came out from the shelter of the islands, a light southeast
breeze, that barely rippled the water, struck them.

“A favorable enough wind, if we want to go direct to the Kaministikwia,”
remarked Hugh, “but do we?”

“It is at the Kaministikwia where we must sell the furs.”

“But how about our revenge on Ohrante? Are we to let him meet those
reinforcements at his Torture Island, and then go on capturing innocent
people and putting them to death for his own pleasure? Ohrante is a
menace to both white men and Ojibwas, Blaise.”

“Yes, I know that,” the younger lad replied slowly, “but what can you and
I alone do against him and his band and the new braves who come to join
him? I am as eager as you to see Ohrante destroyed. I long to avenge my
father by doing the deed with my own hands, but we must plan cautiously.
If we are over rash, we shall fail.”

“What would you do then, Blaise?”

“I would go quickly to the Kaministikwia, leave the furs there, and find
other men to go with us to the Isle of Torture.”

“That will take a long time,” Hugh objected. “We may be too late.”

“Then we will cross to Minong again. We know where his camp is. Oh, we
can find men eager to seek out Ohrante and his wolf pack wherever they
may be, and destroy them like the wolves they are. The X Y agent will
help us to raise a party. Ohrante was brought into this country by the
Old Company. He is a skillful hunter and took to them many pelts.”

“True. The New Company will be glad to help capture the fellow no doubt,”
Hugh agreed.

“But you and I, as our father’s sons, will claim the right to deal with
him.” There was a hard, fierce note in the lad’s voice. Jean Beaupré had
not been a mild man, yet it was not so much the hot-tempered French
father that spoke now in the son, as the fierce, implacable savage.
Bitterly as Hugh hated the giant Mohawk, he sensed something different
and alien in his half-brother’s passion. Through the weeks of constant
association with Blaise, Hugh had ceased ordinarily to think of him as
Indian, but now, for the moment, he was not Blaise Beaupré, but
Attekonse, Ojibwa. Yet it was the white boy who was the most impatient at
the thought of delay in dealing with Ohrante.

The wind, however, had apparently settled the question. The breeze would
carry the boat northwest to Thunder Bay, but would be more hindrance than
help in going southwest to Grand Portage. In the lee of an island, the
brothers raised their mast and ran up their sail. As they paddled out
from shelter, the breeze caught the canvas and they were off across the
lake.

Clouds had covered the moon, and it was too dark to sight Thunder Cape.
The boys could do nothing but run before the wind and trust to it to
carry them somewhere near their destination. At any rate they were
leaving Minong and putting the miles between themselves and the cruel,
self-appointed chief of the island. That wonderful and beautiful island,
which the white men had appropriately called Royale, deserved a better
king, and the first step in the right direction was to depose the present
usurper, thought Hugh with grim humor.




                                  XXXI
                          WITH WIND AND WAVES


In the light breeze the bateau sailed but slowly, and the boys, in their
impatience, strove to increase speed by helping with the paddles. As they
went farther out, however, the wind increased, and before long they laid
aside the blades, satisfied that they were making fairly good progress.

Overhead the stars shone dimly. To the south and east, the sky was banked
with masses of cloud. Hugh, glancing that way, felt uneasy. A rain-storm
coming down upon the heavily loaded, open bateau would be unpleasant if
not disastrous. From the behavior of the sail, he knew that the wind was
less steady. During the past two months he had learned something of the
moods of Lake Superior, and he understood that he must be ready for a
sudden shift. He had been handling both sheet and tiller, but now he
turned the steering over to his brother.

The change of wind came suddenly and with force. For a few moments Hugh
had his hands full. Blaise obeyed orders on the instant, sail and boat
were swung about, and were soon running freely before the wind again.

“We may not reach the Kaministikwia so soon as we hoped,” Hugh commented,
when the momentary danger was past. “The wind seems to be taking us where
it chooses. As near as I can tell we must be running almost directly west
now instead of northwest.”

Blaise looked up at the only patch of clear sky visible. “Yes, I think we
go west. If the wind holds steady we shall reach the shore somewhere
between the Kaministikwia and the Grand Portage. If it shifts again——” He
broke off with a shrug.

“If it shifts again,” Hugh took up the words, “we shall reach somewhere
sometime, unless we go to the bottom. Even that would be a better fate
than falling into Ohrante’s hands.”

The breeze was increasing in force, the waves running ever higher. Hugh
and Blaise were kept busy and alert. Before the wind, the bateau was
sailing swiftly enough so that there was little danger of following seas
actually swamping it, but, heavily laden, it rode low, with little
buoyancy. Every time it pitched down into the trough of the waves it
shipped water. Those were the dangerous moments. With the utmost care in
handling sail and rudder, the brothers could do little to insure against
disaster. To keep straight before the wind, not to lose control of sail
or rudder, and to take the chances with coolness and composure was about
all there was to do. As they drove on in the darkness, now riding high on
the summit of a wave, now pitching down between walls of water, they lost
all count of time.

The waves seemed to be flattening out a little. Surely they were less
high and long, yet they were even more troublesome, for they had grown
choppy and uneven. When Blaise steered straight with them, Hugh found the
sail swinging around. When he sailed directly before the wind, the boat
pitched at an angle with the waves.

“The wind has shifted again,” he said anxiously.

“It comes from the northeast now,” Blaise returned.

Both were too busy and anxious to talk. Hugh confined his speech to
sharply given orders and Blaise to answering grunts. The spray of
breaking waves soaked them both, time and again. The boat was shipping a
good deal of water, but bailing was impossible. The elder brother had his
hands full with the sail, the younger was compelled to give all his
attention to steering.

Gradually conditions improved. The wind steadied and the waves obeyed it.
Once more the bateau could ride them straight, while running directly
before the breeze. The clouds were broken now, moving swiftly across the
sky, covering and uncovering the moon and stars. Whenever the boys dared
to take their eyes from sail and water, they glanced upward. When enough
sky had been blown clean to show them the position of the moon and
principal stars, both lads were surprised to learn that dawn was not
nearer. It seemed to them that they had been pitching about in the waves
for a very long time, yet the day was still hours away.

The wind continued strong, the waves were higher than ever, but the
brothers had gained more confidence in the sailing qualities of the boat
and in their own ability to handle it. Less water was being shipped, and
by bailing when they had a chance, they managed to keep it from rising
too high. Now that the sky was clearing and there was more light on the
lake, they could see farther across it. As the boat rose to the top of a
wave, Blaise said suddenly, “L’isle du Paté.”

Hugh looked quickly and, before the bateau pitched down between the
waves, he caught a glimpse of a compact, abrupt, black mass towering from
the water not many miles to his right. There seemed to be no chance of
reaching the mouth of the Kaministikwia though. To turn and run in past
the south side of Pie Island was out of the question. The square sail
would be worse than useless, and the laden bateau would inevitably be
swamped in the trough of the waves.

The stars were waning in the paling sky. The short summer night was
drawing to a close and dawn was approaching. South and west of Pie Island
and nearer at hand, lower lines of shore appeared, the chain of islands
from one of which the adventurers had set out for the Isle Royale. Those
islands, across several miles of heaving water, were still too far away
to be reached. Wind and waves were carrying the bateau by. The sun,
coming up in an almost clear sky, found the boat still running southwest
on a course almost parallel with the unattainable chain of islands.

As the hours passed, the boys were encouraged to discover that they were
drawing gradually nearer and nearer to the islands on the right. What was
still better, they were bearing straight towards land ahead, continuous,
high land they knew must be the main shore. It seemed that they must
reach the mainland not many miles to the southwest of the place where the
chain of islands diverged from it. Hugh had long since ceased to be
particular where he landed, if it was only in some spot where food might
be obtained. Rations the day before had been very scanty, and he was
exceedingly hungry.

The wind was strong but steady, the waves long and high. The bateau, as
it plunged down into the trough, continued to ship a little water, but
the boys kept it down by bailing when a hand and arm could be spared.
They were borne nearer and nearer to the land. As they ran past a group
of small islets not more than a half mile distant, with a larger and
higher island showing beyond them, Hugh glanced that way and considered
trying to turn.

Blaise guessed his brother’s thought. “The mainland is not far now,” he
said, “and we go straight towards it. Let us go on until we can land
without danger to the furs. There will be more chance to find food on the
mainland also.”

Both of the younger boy’s arguments had weight with Hugh. He gave up the
idea of attempting to turn, and they went on with wind and waves. At the
end of another hour they were bearing down upon an irregular, rocky
point.

“Is that island or mainland, do you think?” Hugh inquired.

“Mainland,” was the unhesitating reply. “I remember the place. Have I not
passed it three times in the last two moons?”

Hugh made no answer. He himself must have passed that spot twice within
two months, but there were so many rocky points along the shore. Hugh was
observing enough in the white man’s way, but he did not see how Blaise
could remember all those places and tell them apart.

The bateau ran close to the point. When a bay came into view, Hugh
expected Blaise to steer in, but the latter made no move to do so.

“It is steep and rocky there,” he explained, with a nod towards the
abrupt-shored cove. “Beyond yet a little way is a better place, shallow
and well protected.”

Past another point and along a steep rock shore they sailed. Here they
were in much calmer water, for the points broke the force of wind and
waves. As they approached a group of small islands, Blaise remarked, “It
is best to take down the sail. We can paddle in.”

Accordingly Hugh lowered the sail and took up his paddle, while Blaise
steered the bateau in among the islets. In a few moments the haven lay
revealed, an almost round bay, its entrance nearly closed by islets. The
islands and the points on either side were rocky, but the shores of the
bay were low and densely wooded with tamarack, cedar and black spruce.
The water was almost calm, and the boys made a landing on a bit of beach
on the inner side and under the high land of the right hand point.

Hugh had not realized that he was particularly tired. The strain of the
dangerous voyage had kept him alert, but he had had no sleep for two
nights. Now, suddenly, an overpowering weariness and weakness came over
him. His legs almost collapsed under him. He dropped down on the beach,
too utterly exhausted to move. He was on solid land again, but he could
scarcely realize it. His head was dizzy, and the moment his eyes closed
he seemed to be heaving up and down again.




                                 XXXII
                    THE FIRE AT THE END OF THE TRAIL


When Hugh woke, the dizziness and sense of swaying up and down were gone.
He sat up, feeling strangely weak and hollow, and looked about him. The
bateau was drawn up on the beach, but Blaise was nowhere in sight. From
the shadows Hugh could tell that the sun was on its downward journey. He
had slept several hours. He was just gathering up his courage to get up,
when he heard a stone rattling down the rock hill behind him. Turning his
head, he saw Blaise descending. The boy was carrying several fish strung
on a withe. Hugh eyed those fish with hungry eyes. He could almost eat
them raw, he thought. He got to his feet and looked around for fuel. Not
until he had a fire kindled, and,—too impatient to let it burn down to
coals or to wait for water to heat,—was holding a piece of fish on a
crotched stick before the blaze, did he ask his younger brother where he
had been.

“I slept for a while,” Blaise admitted, “but not for long. My hunger was
too great. I took my gun and my line and climbed to the top of the point.
I went along the steep cliff, but I found no game and no tracks. Then I
came to that rocky bay. The shores are steep there and the water clear. I
climbed out upon a rock and caught these fish. They are not big, but they
are better than no food.”

“They certainly are,” Hugh agreed whole-heartedly.

The elder brother’s pride in his own strength and endurance was humbled.
He had slept, exhausted, for hours, while the half-breed boy, nearly
three years younger than himself, had walked two or three miles in search
of food.

When no eatable morsel of the fish remained, the brothers’ thoughts
turned to their next move.

“We are far nearer the Grand Portage than the Kaministikwia,” Hugh said
thoughtfully. “We had better follow my first plan and go down the shore
instead of up. We can surely find others at the Portage willing to go
with us against Ohrante.”

“It is all we can do,” Blaise assented, “unless we wait here for the wind
to change. It is almost from the north now. We must go against it if we
go up the Bay of Thunder. The other way, the shore will shelter us. But
we cannot start yet. We must wait a little for the waves to go down.”

“And in the meantime we will seek more food,” Hugh added. “Why not try
fishing among those little islands?”

The channels among the islets proved good fishing ground. By sunset the
lads had plenty of trout to insure against any danger of starvation for
another day at least. The waves had gone down enough to permit travel in
the shelter of the shore. Sailing was out of the question, and paddling
the laden bateau would be slow work, but Hugh was too impatient to delay
longer, and Blaise more than willing to go on.

After half an hour of slow progress, the younger brother made a
suggestion. “We are not far from the Rivière aux Tourtres now.” He used
the French name for the Pigeon River, a name which seems to mean “river
of turtles.” The word _tourtres_ doubtless referred to turtle doves or
pigeons. “To paddle this bateau,” Blaise went on, “is very slow, and to
reach Wauswaugoning by water we must go far out into the waves around
that long point below the river mouth. But along the south bank of the
river is an Ojibwa trail. At a bend the trail leaves the river and goes
on across the point to Wauswaugoning. We shall save time if we go that
way, by land.”

“What about the boat and the furs?”

“We will leave them behind. There is a little cove near the river mouth
where the bateau will be safe. The furs we can hide among the rocks. We
shall not be gone many days if all goes well. No white man I think and
few Ojibwas go that way. An Ojibwa will not disturb a cache,” Blaise
added confidently.

“Yet I don’t like the idea of leaving the furs,” Hugh protested.

“They will be safer there than at the Grand Portage, where the men of the
Old Company might find them.”

“Why not turn them over to the X Y clerk at the Portage?” Hugh
questioned.

“No, no. If our father had wanted them taken there he would have said so.
Again and again he said to take them to the New Company at the
Kaministikwia. He had a debt there, a small one, and he did not like the
man in charge at the Grand Portage. There was some trouble between them,
I know not what.”

Blaise was usually willing to yield to his elder brother’s judgment, but
this time he proved obstinate. Jean Beaupré’s commands must be carried
out to the letter. His younger son would not consent to the slightest
modification.

Darkness had come when the two reached the mouth of the Pigeon River, but
the moon was bright and Blaise had no difficulty steering into the little
cove. Alders growing down to the water concealed the boat when it was
pulled up among them. Blaise assured Hugh that, even in daylight, it
could not be seen from the narrow entrance to the cove. The mast was
taken down and the sail spread over the bottom of a hollow in the rocks.
On the canvas the bales of furs were piled, and a blanket was thrown over
the heap. The boys cut several poles, laid them across the hole, the ends
resting on the rock rim, and covered them with sheets of birch bark,
stripped from an old, half-dead tree. The crude roof, weighted down with
stones, would serve to keep out small animals as well as to shed rain.
All this work was done rapidly by the light of the moon.

The cache completed, Blaise led Hugh to the opening of the trail at the
river mouth. The trail, the boy said, had been used by the Ojibwas for
many years. A narrow, rough, but distinct path had been trodden by the
many moccasined feet that had travelled over it. The moonlight filtered
through the trees, and Blaise, who had been that way before, followed the
track readily. With them the brothers carried the remaining blanket, the
gun, ammunition, kettle and the rest of their fish. As Blaise had said,
the trail ran along the south bank until a bend was reached, then,
leaving the river, went on in the same westerly direction across the
point of land between the mouth of the Pigeon River and Wauswaugoning
Bay. The whole distance was not more than three miles, and the boys made
good time.

Hugh thought they must be nearing the end of the path, when Blaise
stopped suddenly with a low exclamation. The elder brother looked over
the younger’s shoulder. Among the trees ahead glowed the yellow light of
a small fire.

“Wait here a moment,” Blaise whispered. And he slipped forward among the
trees.

In a few minutes he was back again. “There are three men,” he said,
“sleeping by a fire, a white man and two Ojibwas. One of the Ojibwas I
know and he knew our father. We need not fear, but because of the white
man, we will say nothing of the furs.”

The two went forward almost noiselessly, but, in spite of their quiet
approach, when they came out of the woods by the fire, one of the Indians
woke and sat up.

“Bo-jou,” remarked Blaise.

The second Indian was awake now. “Bo-jou, bo-jou,” both replied, gazing
at the newcomers.

The white man rolled over, but before he could speak, Hugh sprang towards
him with a cry of pleasure. “Baptiste, it is good to see you! How come
you here?”

“Eh lá, Hugh Beaupré, and I might ask that of you yourself,” returned the
astonished Frenchman. “I inquired for you at the Grand Portage, but the
men at the fort knew nothing of you. When I said you were with your
brother Attekonse, one man remembered seeing him with a white man. That
was all I could learn. I was sore afraid some evil had befallen you. You
are long in returning to the Sault.”

“Yes,” Hugh replied with some hesitation. “I have stayed longer than I
intended. Is the _Otter_ at the Grand Portage, Baptiste?”

“No, she has returned to the New Fort. I came on her to the Grand
Portage. We brought supplies for the post and for the northmen going
inland to winter. There was a man at the Portage, a Canadian like myself,
who wanted sorely to go to the Kaministikwia. He has wife and child
there, and the mate of the sloop brought him word that the child was very
sick. So as I have neither wife nor child and am in no haste, I let him
have my place. Now I am returning by canoe, with Manihik and Keneu here.”

At the mention of their names, the two Indians nodded gravely towards
Hugh and repeated their “Bo-jou, bo-jou.”

“We camp here until the wind goes down,” Baptiste concluded.

During the Frenchman’s explanation, Hugh had been doing some rapid
thinking and had come to a decision. He knew Baptiste for a simple,
honest, true-hearted fellow. In one of his Indian companions Blaise had
already expressed confidence.

“Baptiste,” Hugh asked abruptly, “have you ever heard of Ohrante, the
Iroquois hunter?”

There was a fierce grunt from one of the Indians. The black eyes of both
were fixed on Hugh.

“Truly I have,” Baptiste replied promptly. “As great a villain as ever
went unhanged.”

“Would you like to help get him hanged?”

Keneu sprang to his feet. It was evident he had understood something of
what Hugh had said. “I go,” he cried fiercely in bad French. “Where is
the Iroquois wolf?”

“There is an island down the shore,” Hugh went on, “the Island of
Torture, Ohrante calls it, where he and his band take their prisoners and
torture them to death. Sometime soon he is to hold a sort of council
there.”

“How know you that?” Baptiste interrupted.

“I shall have to tell you the whole story.” Hugh turned to his
half-brother. “Blaise, shall we tell them all? Baptiste I can trust, I
know.”

“As you think best, my brother.”

Sitting on a log by the fire at the edge of the woods, while the
moonlight flooded the bay beyond, Hugh related his strange tale to the
amazed and excited Canadian and the intent, fierce-eyed Keneu, the “War
Eagle.” The other Indian also watched and listened, but it was evident
from his face that he understood little or nothing of what was said. Hugh
made few concealments. Frankly he told the story of the search for the
hidden furs, the encounters with Ohrante and his band, the capture and
escape, and what Blaise had learned from overhearing the conversations
between Monga and the Indian with the red head band. Hugh did not
mention, however, the packet he carried under his shirt, nor did he say
definitely where he and Blaise had left the bateau and the furs. Those
details were not essential to the story, and might as well be omitted.

“We know now it was through Ohrante father was killed,” the boy
concluded, “and we, Blaise and I, intend that the Iroquois shall pay the
penalty for his crime. He has other evil deeds to pay for as well, and
that isn’t all. As long as he is at liberty, he is a menace to white man
and peaceable Indian alike. He calls himself Chief of Minong, and he has
an ambition to be a sort of savage king. He is swollen with vanity and
belief in his own greatness, and he seems to be a natural leader of men,
with a sort of uncanny influence over those he draws about him. One
moment you think him ridiculous, but the next you are not sure he is not
a great man. If he succeeds in gathering a really strong band he can do
serious harm.”

Keneu gave a grunt of assent, and Baptiste nodded emphatically. “He must
be taken,” the latter said.

“Taken or destroyed, like the wolf he is,” Hugh replied grimly. “We have
a plan, Blaise and I.”

For nearly an hour longer, the five sat by the fire discussing, in
English, French and Ojibwa, Hugh’s plan. Then, a decision reached, each
rolled himself in his blanket for a few hours’ sleep.




                                 XXXIII
                          THE CAPTURE OF MONGA


Baptiste’s canoe was large enough to accommodate Hugh and Blaise, and the
party were up and away early. The lake was no longer rough, so they made
good time through Wauswaugoning Bay and around the point to the Grand
Portage. Though Baptiste had been employed, in one capacity or another,
by the Old Northwest Company, he was under no contract. An independent
spirited fellow, who came and went much as he pleased, he did not feel
under any obligation to the Old Company and was not an ardent partisan of
that organization, so he made no objection when Hugh proposed that they
try the X Y post for help in their undertaking. The men of either company
would be glad no doubt to lay hands on the rascally Iroquois but the X Y
men’s grievance was the stronger, since Ohrante had been in the employ of
the Old Company when he committed his first crime. The white man he had
slain was an independent trapper, affiliated with neither company, but
Jean Beaupré had been under contract, for the one season at least, to the
New Company. To learn that he too had come to his death through the Giant
Mohawk would add fuel to the flame of the X Y men’s anger.

Shunning the Old Company’s dock, the party crossed the bay to the X Y
landing. At the post Hugh and Blaise told as much of their story as was
essential to prove that they had really encountered Ohrante, had learned
his plans and knew where to lay hands on him. The time for the annual
meeting of the New Northwest Company, still held at the Grand Portage
post, was approaching. None of the partners or leading men had yet
arrived, but most of the northmen, as the men who wintered inland west of
the lake, were called, had come with their furs, and a considerable
number of Indians were gathered at the post. The agent in charge could
not leave, but in a very few minutes the boys had recruited a dozen men,
half-breeds and Indians, with one white man, a Scotchman, to lead them.

It would not do to approach the Island of Torture in too great force.
Hugh and Blaise, with Baptiste and the two Indians, were to go first,
find out whether Ohrante’s recruits had assembled and watch for the
coming of the chief himself. The men from the Grand Portage, in two
canoes, would start later. Hugh had a very simple plan, which promised to
be effective, to prevent Ohrante from leaving his council island before
the Grand Portage party arrived.

The plan of campaign arranged, the scouts got under way at once. As they
rounded the high point to the south and west of the Grand Portage Bay,
they noticed, coming from the open lake, a large canoe with only two men.
It was headed straight for the land, but suddenly swung about and turned
down shore. Blaise, who was second from the bow, raised his paddle for a
moment, while he gazed intently at the other canoe.

Turning his head, he called back to Hugh and Baptiste, “Red Band! We must
catch them. It is Red Band and I think Monga.”

“_Vite!_ Make speed!” ordered Baptiste. “We will separate those two from
the rest of Ohrante’s rascals.”

He scarcely needed to give the command. Keneu, in the bow, had already
quickened his powerful stroke. The others followed his lead and the five
blades dipped and rose with vigorous, rapid rhythm. The Indians ahead did
their best, bending to their paddles with desperate energy, but their
canoe was fully as large as Baptiste’s and they were two paddles to five.
The pursuers gained steadily. They must certainly overtake the fugitives.

Suddenly the fleeing canoe swerved towards the land. Keneu saw in an
instant what the two men were trying to do. They intended to beach their
boat and take to the woods, trusting to lose their pursuers in the thick
growth. The Indian bow-man gave a sharp order. Baptiste’s canoe swung in
towards shore. It must cut off the fugitives, get between them and the
land. The shore was steep and rocky, and there was no good place to beach
a boat. Yet so great was the panic of Monga and Red Band that they kept
straight on. Despairing of escape by water, they were ready to smash
their canoe on the rocks and take a chance of reaching land.

They did not even get near to the shore. In their panic haste, they
failed to notice a warning ripple and eddy ahead. Their canoe struck full
on the jagged edge of a rock just below the surface. The pursuers were
close enough to hear the ripping sound, as the sharp rock tore a great
gash in the thin bark. The water rushed in. Red Band sprang from the bow,
but Monga remained where he was in the stern, the canoe settling under
him.

The pursuers bent to their paddles and shot towards the wrecked boat.
They reached the spot just as Monga was going down, but they did not
intend to let him escape them by drowning. Keneu reached out a sinewy arm
and seized the sinking man by the neck of his deerskin shirt, while the
others threw their bodies the other way and backed water to hold the
canoe steady and keep it off the sharp rock.

The sensation of going down in that cold water must have instilled in
Monga a dread greater than his fear of capture, for he made no struggle
to free himself. As if the fellow had been a fish too large to be landed,
his captors passed him back from hand to hand until he came into the
keeping of the other Indian in the stern. The captive could not be pulled
aboard, so Manihik ordered him to hold to the rim. Kneeling face towards
the stern, he held Monga by the shoulders, and towed him behind the canoe
till Keneu found a landing place.

Red Band had disappeared. Blaise, who had watched, felt sure Monga’s
companion had not reached shore. He had gone down and had not come up.
Either he was unable to swim or had struck his head on a rock. Whatever
had happened, there was no sign of him.

When shallow water was reached, Manihik took good care that his dripping
prisoner should not escape. Monga was towed ashore and his wrists and
ankles bound with rawhide rope. He said not a word, his broad face sullen
and set.

Not until Blaise had asked him several questions in Ojibwa, did the
captive deign to speak. Even then he answered with reluctance, a word or
two at a time in sullen grunts. Then a question suddenly loosed his
tongue, and he poured out a torrent of guttural speech. The other two
Indians and Baptiste, who understood a little Ojibwa, listened intently,
but Hugh could make out no word, except the names Ohrante and Minong.

When Monga paused, Blaise, his hazel eyes shining, turned to his brother.
“We have not so many enemies to oppose us as we thought. Ohrante has only
five of his old men left. The young Iroquois who captured you is dead.”

“That fellow dead?” Hugh exclaimed. “Are you sure Monga isn’t lying?”

“He speaks the truth, I am certain,” Blaise replied confidently. “When
Ohrante found you had escaped, he was in a great rage. He held the young
Iroquois, Monga and Red Band to blame, and threatened all three with
death, unless they found you and brought you back. Because the small
canoe was gone, they believed you had escaped by water. We hoped the
empty canoe might drift up the bay, but they found it not. The Iroquois
thought you might have gone into the Bay of Manitos. Monga had no wish to
go there. He was afraid of the giant manitos, he says, but he was
desperate and at last agreed. They found our fire on the stones at the
end of that island. Monga believed you had crossed the mouth of the bay
and had gone on the other side of Minong, but the Iroquois wished to go
up the narrow channel. They went up the channel, as we know, to what they
believed to be the end. The shallow water and the fallen cedar deceived
them. So they turned back and went on across the mouth of the Bay of
Manitos.”

“What were Ohrante and the others doing all that time?”

“They searched the western side of Minong. Monga says Ohrante would not
go into the Bay of Manitos himself.”

“Then he evidently didn’t suspect our trick.”

“No, but I think perhaps the young Iroquois suspected, and that was why
he wished to search the bay.” Blaise went on with his tale. “Monga and
Red Band were in despair when they could not find you. They proposed that
the three of them should run away to the mainland, but the Iroquois was
too proud to be a coward. He wished to go on with the search or go back
to take the punishment. So Monga pretended he could see the end of a
canoe among the trees on an island. They landed, and Monga and Red Band
murdered the Iroquois and left him there. Then they started for the
mainland.”

“They were the ones we saw when we were going out of the bay.”

“Yes, they went around the long point, past that bay, and along the
northwest side of Minong, but the wind came up and they could not cross.
This morning they have crossed over.”

“We should have nothing further to fear from Monga then, even if we had
not captured him.”

Blaise shrugged contemptuously. “Monga is a coward and a fool. He says he
was angry because the traders sold him a bad musket. It exploded when he
tried to fire it and blew off his little finger. So he joined the Mohawk
wolf who boasted that he would drive the white men away. Monga thought
Ohrante was a great chief and a powerful medicine man, but when he
proposed to go to Minong, Monga was afraid. Then Ohrante told him that
Minong was a wonderful place where they would grow rich and mighty and
have everything they wished. He said he was such a great medicine man
that the spirits of the island would do his bidding.”

“And they didn’t,” put in Hugh with a grin.

The swift, flashing smile like his father’s crossed the younger boy’s
face. “Monga was disappointed to find Minong little different from the
mainland. When he heard the spirits threatening Ohrante and saw the chief
frightened, he began to lose faith in him. You escaped, and Ohrante’s
medicine was not strong enough to find you and bring you back. He would
not even go to the Bay of Manitos to seek you. So Monga knew the Chief of
Minong was just a man like other men. He has run away and wants no more
of Ohrante.”

“Just the same I think we had better keep an eye on him,” Hugh decided.
“We’ll take him with us.”

Blaise nodded. “There is still much Monga has not told us,” he replied.

It was finally settled that Baptiste and the two Indians should take the
prisoner with them, while Hugh and Blaise went on ahead in the captured
canoe. It was their plan to approach the Island of Torture under cover of
darkness. Conditions being good, the two boys paddled steadily. Late in
the afternoon they paused for a meal. They had not many more miles to go,
and would wait until nightfall. Before they had finished their supper,
Baptiste’s canoe came in sight. Monga had expressed willingness to wield
a paddle, but Baptiste did not trust him. The “Loon” rode as a compulsory
passenger, wrists and ankles still bound. At Hugh’s signal, Baptiste ran
in to shore to wait with the others for darkness.




                                 XXXIV
                             MONGA’S STORY


During the enforced wait for nightfall, Blaise put more questions to the
Indian prisoner. Monga, anxious to ingratiate himself with his captors,
talked freely.

Ohrante, the captive said, after his first crime, capture and escape, had
fled with Monga and the other Ojibwa who had helped him to get away. At
the lake shore they had come across two Iroquois hunters, the tall fellow
with the malicious grin and another. When Ohrante proposed to take refuge
on Minong, the Ojibwas held back. The Mohawk, however, told them a long
story about how his mother, a captive among the Iroquois, had been a
direct descendant of the ancient tribe or clan who had once lived on
Minong and had mined copper there. Her ancestors had been chieftains of
that powerful people, Ohrante asserted, and he himself was hereditary
Chief of Minong. From his mother’s people and also from his father, who
was a Mohawk medicine man, the giant claimed to have inherited marvellous
magic powers. He had further increased those powers by going through
various mysterious experiences and ordeals. The manitos of Minong, he
said, awaited his coming. He had had a dream, several moons before, in
which the spirits, in the forms of birds and beasts, had appeared to him
and begged him to come and rule over them. They would do his bidding and
aid him to destroy his enemies and to become chief of all the tribes
about the Upper Lakes. He would unite those tribes into a powerful nation
and drive the white men from the country.

Persuaded by Ohrante’s arguments, the four Indians accompanied him to
Minong. Their first camp was made on the southwestern end of the island.
There Ohrante and the two Ojibwas, secure from pursuit, remained while
the others crossed again to the mainland and brought back more recruits,
an Ojibwa, a Cree and another Iroquois hunter. The band of eight roamed
about the western side of the island by land and water. Most of the
winter they spent in a long, narrow bay, where, according to Monga, they
found many pieces of copper. In the spring, in search of the wonders
their chief had promised them, they reached the northeastern end of the
island. Then came a hard storm of wind, rain and snow, accompanied by
fog. Three days after the storm, when the waves had gone down, the band
entered, for the first time, the bay west of the long point. There they
found and captured Jean Beaupré and Black Thunder. It was evident from
Monga’s tale that he knew nothing of the hidden furs. Ohrante had
accepted the story Jean Beaupré had told of having lost everything in the
storm, when his bateau, driven out of its course, had been dashed into a
rift in the rocks of the long point. Undoubtedly Beaupré must have had
some warning of the approach of the Indians, for he had had time, as the
boys knew, to secrete the furs. The fact that Black Thunder had suffered
an injury to one leg, when the boat was wrecked, might account for the
failure of the two to dodge the giant and his band.

When Monga finished this part of his story, Blaise turned from him to
translate to Hugh.

“Ask him,” the elder brother suggested, “if father knew he was on the
Isle Royale.”

Blaise put the question and translated the reply. “Monga says our father
knew not where he was. The weather was thick and cloudy, there was no sun
and it was not possible to see far. Our father thought he was somewhere
on the mainland. Ohrante did not tell him where he was. The chief wished
no man to know the hiding place. The prisoners were kept bound. They were
given something cooked from leaves that made them sleep sound. Then they
were put in the canoes and taken to the other end of the island. By night
they were brought across to the Isle of Torture.”

“That explains father’s not telling you where he was wrecked. He had no
idea he had been driven to Minong. But why did Ohrante bring his captives
away over here? What was his motive? Can you find out?”

Again Blaise asked a question, listening gravely to the answer. “Monga
says that he and Ohrante and the other Ojibwa camped on that little
island they now call the Isle of Torture, when they first escaped from
our father, and Ohrante dreamed that night that he had many white
captives and put them to the torture one after another. Monga thinks it
was because of that dream that the chief brought his captives over to
that island.”

“How did father escape?” Hugh questioned eagerly.

Again Blaise turned to Monga, and soon had the rest of the story. At the
Torture Island, Ohrante had met with several recruits, who brought with
them a supply of liquor stolen from some trading post. The torture of the
two captives, Ohrante’s part of the entertainment, was postponed until
night. During the day the party feasted and drank. They consumed all of
the liquor, which was full strength, not diluted with water as it usually
was before being sold to the Indians. By night the whole band were lying
about the island in a heavy stupor. Even the lookout, who had been
stationed in a tree to give warning of the approach of danger, had come
down to get his share.

When the band came to their senses next morning, they found the prisoners
gone. The thongs with which they had been tied lay on the ground, one
piece of rawhide having been worn through by being pulled across a
sharp-edged bit of rock. A canoe was gone and another had a great hole in
it, but a third boat, on the other side of the island, the prisoners had
not found. Monga’s Ojibwa comrade, the one who had helped Ohrante to
escape justice, had been set to guard the captives. In a rage, Ohrante
threatened the fellow with torture in their stead. The guard begged to be
allowed to track the escaped prisoners, and the chief consented. A high
wind had blown all night and the lake was rough, too rough for the
fugitives to have travelled far by water. The channel between shore and
island was protected from the wind, however, and some of the band crossed
and found the canoe the escaped prisoners had used. Black Thunder’s lame
leg prevented rapid travelling, and at the Devil Track River, the
negligent guard and one of the Iroquois overtook the fugitives. Stealing
quietly upon them, the Ojibwa attacked Jean Beaupré, the Iroquois, Black
Thunder. Black Thunder struggled desperately, and the Iroquois was
obliged to fight for his life. He slew Black Thunder, only to find his
Ojibwa companion lying dead a little farther on. Jean Beaupré was gone.

The Iroquois tried to follow Beaupré, but, being himself wounded, fell
fainting from loss of blood. Monga and another of the band, sent after
the two by Ohrante, found the Iroquois unable to travel without help. It
was Monga who had kindled the cooking fire, the remains of which Hugh had
found. Blaise spoke of finding the blood-stained tunic and Monga said
that the Iroquois had stripped it from Black Thunder, but Monga and the
other Indian would not let him carry the shirt away for fear of the
vengeance of the thunder bird pictured upon it. The three returned to the
Island of Torture without attempting to follow Beaupré farther. When the
lake calmed, two of the band took the winter catch of furs to the Grand
Portage and exchanged them for supplies. Then the whole party returned to
Minong, living for some time at the southern end. In a later raid they
captured the unfortunate Indian, Ohrante’s personal enemy, whom the boys
had seen being tortured. One of the chief’s men was killed in the
encounter, another deserted and several were left on the mainland to
obtain recruits.

The rest went back to Minong and travelled to the northern end again. In
the bay west of the long, high point, they found the spot the crew of the
_Otter_ had cleared, and built their wigwams there. The discovery that
someone else had visited the place made Ohrante a bit uneasy, and he kept
a lookout stationed on the high ridge. When the Beaupré brothers reached
the point, all of the band except two happened to be away on a hunting
trip. The two guards, neglectful of lookout duty, had failed to see the
lads approach. It must have been one of them who had fired the shot that
aroused the boys at dawn. Ohrante and one canoe of the hunting party
returned that very day. The call that had so startled Hugh, when he was
about to open the packet, was a signal from one of the camp guards to the
returning chief. Luckily for the brothers they were well hidden in the
pit, and Ohrante and his men were back at their camp long before the two
lads reached theirs. The other canoe of hunters did not return until the
following day. Luck had been poor, and Monga proposed to his companions
that they round the long, high point and look for game on the other side.
They were headed towards the rocky tip, when, suddenly, before their
astonished eyes, a giant form appeared on the open rocks. The giant
turned, looked straight at the canoe, then seemed to sink into the
ground. Just as he vanished, however, a second giant, even taller than
the first, loomed up. Monga and his comrades turned and fled. Monga
looked back once, just in time to see one of the giants spring up out of
the rocks, he said. The frightened Indians took refuge beyond the low
point on the other side of the bay, and stayed there until the fog came
in, before daring to venture to camp. They told Ohrante of seeing
Nanibozho and Kepoochikan on the end of the long point, but he, to
strengthen his followers’ belief in his magical powers, insisted next day
on rounding the point. In the Bay of Manitos, the Chief of Minong had the
scare of his life.

Darkness had come by the time Blaise had learned all this from the
prisoner and had translated it to Hugh and Baptiste. It was time to make
a start. Monga was left behind, and to prevent his crying out or
attracting attention in any way, he was gagged and tied to a tree. Then
the others embarked in Baptiste’s canoe. The weather favored them. The
night was dark, not a ray of moonlight penetrating the thick clouds. Only
a light breeze rippled the water and the air was unusually warm.

Noiselessly, through the deepest shadows, the canoe approached the Island
of Torture. From the upper end, the black mass appeared to be quite
deserted. No gleam of fire shone through the trees. As the canoe slipped
along close to the mainland, however, the flickering light of a small
fire appeared ahead. That fire was not on the island, but on the mainland
opposite. Swerving in to shore, the canoe was brought to a stop, its prow
just touching a bit of beach. Without speaking a word, and making
scarcely a sound, the five stepped out, deposited the boat upon the
pebbles and gathered around it in a knot.

Keneu, his mouth close to the half-breed boy’s ear, whispered a word or
two. Blaise nodded, and in an instant the Indian was gone into the
darkness. Blaise turned to Hugh and explained in the softest of whispers:
“Keneu goes to learn who they are.”

Silent, almost motionless, the rest of the party remained standing on the
bit of beach in the thick darkness of the sheltering bushes. Hugh’s eyes
were fastened on the black, silent island across the narrow channel. Had
Ohrante changed his plans? He felt his younger brother’s hand on his arm,
and turned about. He could just distinguish a low, hissing sound, which
he realized was the Indian making his report to Blaise.

The sound ceased and the boy’s lips were at Hugh’s ear. “There are four
men camping there. One is an Iroquois. They wait for Ohrante to come.
Then they go to the island.”

“He hasn’t come yet, then?” Hugh whispered back.

“No, these are new men except the Iroquois. They come to join Ohrante.
They have liquor, but the Iroquois will not let them drink until the
chief comes.”

“Then the only thing we can do is wait.”

“That is all. We can watch the island from here. When Ohrante comes we
shall know it.”




                                  XXXV
                         THE FALL OF THE GIANT


As the wait might be long, the party decided to snatch a few minutes’
sleep, one of them remaining on the lookout for the arrival of the Chief
of Minong. It was some time after midnight, when Keneu, who was doing
guard duty, discerned something moving on the lake, coming down shore. He
laid his hand on the half-breed boy’s forehead, and Blaise woke at once.

“A canoe,” the Indian whispered.

Blaise raised his head to look. “The men from the Grand Portage. What
idiots! Why not keep closer in?”

The Indian’s hand pressed the lad’s shoulder warningly. “Wait,” he
breathed. “Let them go by.”

Secure in the black shelter of the alders that overhung the bit of beach,
Blaise watched the approaching canoe. It came on rapidly, confidently. As
it drew close in the darkness of the channel between mainland and island,
the boy’s eyes could make out no details. But his ears caught something
that made him heartily glad he had not signalled that canoe as had been
his first thought. What he heard was an order spoken in Ojibwa, in the
unmistakable, high-pitched, nasal voice of Ohrante. In obedience to the
command, the canoe swung away from the mainland towards the Island of
Torture, and disappeared in the blackness of its margin.

Blaise drew a long breath and whispered in Keneu’s ear, “Go watch the
camp and see what they do.”

Keneu made no reply, but Blaise knew he was gone, though he heard no
sound as the Indian slipped through the bushes. In the same quiet way
that Keneu had waked him, by laying his hand on the forehead of each,
Blaise aroused his companions. In a few minutes all were sitting up, wide
awake, staring at the dark water and the impenetrable blackness of the
island. There were no stars or moon. The air was unusually warm and
sultry. A pale flash lit up the dark sky for an instant. Some moments
later a low rumbling came to their ears. A storm now might spoil all
their plans, thought Hugh anxiously.

A gleam of light shone through the trees at the farther end of the
island. A fire had been kindled as a signal that the Chief of Minong had
arrived. Again the sky was lit by a white flash. Again the thunder rolled
and rumbled. From down the channel came a sound of splashing water. No
canoe, paddled by Indians, ever made such a splashing as that. “Have they
all jumped in? Are they swimming across?” thought Hugh.

Rolling over, he crawled down the beach. His head almost in the water, he
gazed down the channel. Another flash of lightning swept the sky. Hugh
crouched low, but in the instant of the illumination, he saw, crossing
from mainland to island, a canoe with several men, and in its wake
something black rising above the water. Hugh could not believe that the
swimming thing was really what, in the instant’s flash of light, it
appeared to be.

He turned to slip up the beach again, and found Blaise at his side. In
silence the two went back to their place beside the canoe. A few minutes
later, Blaise felt a hand on his shoulder, and Keneu’s voice spoke in his
ear, in a low, hissing whisper.

“They have left their camp. They have crossed to the island, where a fire
now burns.”

“How many canoes?”

“Only one.”

“Are other men coming?”

“I think not. I think they are the only ones.”

Hugh was growing impatient. It had been his intention to wait to put his
plan into operation until the party on the island had feasted and drunk
and were sleeping. The coming storm, however, threatened to thwart his
strategy. Bad weather might drive Ohrante and his band to the mainland in
search of better shelter. Even if they remained on the island, a violent
storm would delay action. In daylight he could not carry out his scheme,
and dawn was not far off. There was grave risk in acting now, but to
delay might mean to lose all chance of success. Again the lightning
flashed more brightly, the thunder rolled louder and at a shorter
interval. He must act now if at all. He put his mouth to his younger
brother’s ear.

“We must get those canoes. A storm may spoil our chance. We dare not
wait.”

“Yes,” agreed Blaise. He understood the situation quite as well as Hugh.
There was no need for more than the one word.

“You and I and Keneu will go,” Hugh went on. “When we get across, Keneu
must remain with our canoe. The others must stay here to stop the men
from the Grand Portage when they come.”

“Yes,” Blaise replied again, and rose to his feet. “Come,” he said
briefly to the Indian.

In a few whispered words, Hugh explained to Baptiste that he and Manihik
must remain where they were. The Frenchman was inclined to grumble. He
did not like the idea of the boys’ going into action without his support.
Hugh was firm, however, and as the whole plan was his, he was by right
the leader, so Baptiste was forced to submit. By the time Hugh had
finished his explanation, Blaise and Keneu had the canoe in the water.

Just as Hugh, as leader, took his place in the bow, a flash of lightning
lit up the sky. The moment the flash was over, the canoe was off, Blaise
in the center and Keneu in the stern. The paddling was left to the
Indian, Hugh dipping his blade only now and then on one side or the
other, as a signal to the steersman.

The natural clearing, where the fire now blazed bright, was at the other
end of the little island. If the Indians were all gathered around the
fire, they could not see the canoe crossing from the mainland. Someone
might be down at the shore, but the attacking party had to take a chance
of that. Luckily the short passage was accomplished before the next
flash.

On the inner side of the little island, the trees and bushes grew down to
the water. In absolute silence, the canoe slipped along, close in.
Another bright flash of lightning, quickly followed by a peal of thunder,
caused Keneu to hold his blade motionless. The boat was well screened by
the trees, however, and there was no sign that it had been observed.

That flash of lightning had revealed something to Hugh. Just ahead was a
little curve in the margin of the island, and beyond it, a short, blunt
projection, a bit of beach with alders growing well down upon it. On the
beach were two canoes. To reach the spot, however, it would be necessary
to pass an open gap, a sort of lane leading up from the shore to the
place where the fire burned. Through the gap the firelight shone out upon
the water. It would never do to try to pass in the canoe.

Hugh dipped his paddle and gave it a twist. The Indian understood. He too
saw the firelight on the water. The canoe swerved towards shore and
slowed down. Before it could touch and make a noise, Hugh was overside,
stepping quickly but carefully, to avoid the slightest splash. Blaise
followed. Keneu remained in the boat. He allowed his end to swing in far
enough so he could grasp an overhanging branch and hold the craft steady.

Now came the most difficult part of the undertaking, to creep in the
darkness through the dense growth, which came clear to the water line,
around to the beach where the canoe lay. Hugh, as leader, intended to go
first, but he did not get the chance. Before he realized what the younger
boy was about, Blaise had slipped past him and taken the lead. It was
well he did so for Blaise, slender and agile, was an adept at wriggling
his way snake-like, and he seemed to have a sixth sense in the darkness
that Hugh did not possess. So Hugh was constrained to let his younger
brother pick the route. He had all he could do to follow without rustling
or crackling the thick growth. Progress was necessarily very slow, only a
few feet or even inches at a time. Whenever there came a lightning flash,
both lay flat. The flashes were less revealing in the dense growth, and
luckily the trees stood thick between the two lads and the fire.

Blaise had reached the edge of the gap through which the yellow-red
firelight shone. He could see the fire itself, a big, roaring pile, and
the figures moving around it. The sound of voices speaking Ojibwa and
Iroquois came to his ears. Reaching back with one foot, he gave Hugh a
little warning kick, then looked for some way to cross the open space.

The Island of Torture, like most of the islands off the northwest shore
of the lake, consisted of a low, flat-topped, rock ridge descending
gradually to the water on one side and more abruptly on the other. The
lane was a natural opening down a steep slope from the ridge top to the
water. Just at the base of the open rock lane, at the very edge of the
water, grew a row of low shrubs, so low that they did not shut off the
light of the fire, but cast only a narrow line of shadow. The one way to
cross that gap without being seen was to crawl along in the shadow of
those bushes. The water might be shallow there or it might be deep. Lying
flat, Blaise put one hand into the shadowed water. His fingers touched
bottom. He felt around a little, then crawled forward. The water proved
to be only a few inches deep. Prostrate, he wriggled along the rock
bottom in the narrow band of shadow. When Blaise had reached the shelter
of the woods beyond, Hugh followed, taking extreme care to slip along
like an eel, without a splash.

The brothers were now but a short distance from the canoes. The thick
growing alders fringing the pebbles shut off the firelight. The chief
peril was that someone might be guarding the boats. Eyes and ears
strained for the slightest sign of danger, the two crawled forward on
hands and knees. They reached the first canoe without alarm and went on
to the second. Still hidden from the Indians around the fire, the boys
lifted the canoe and turned it bottom side up. Blaise drew his knife from
the sheath and carefully, without a sound of ripping, cut a great hole in
the bark, removing a section between the ribs. Then the two carried the
boat out a few feet and deposited it upon the water. It began to fill
immediately, the water entering the big hole with only a slight gurgling
noise. Even that sound alarmed the lads. They beat a hasty retreat and
lay close under the alders. The Indians around the fire, however, were
too engrossed in their own affairs to heed the sound, if indeed it
carried that far.

A man with a full, deep voice was speaking at length, his tones reaching
the boys where they lay hidden. Every now and then his listeners broke in
with little grunts and ejaculations of approval or assent. A crash of
thunder, following close upon a bright flash, drowned his voice. When the
rumbling ceased, he was no longer speaking. Something else was happening
now. Little cries and grunts, accompanied by the beating together of wood
and metal and the click of rattles in rude rhythm, came to the boys’
ears.

“They are dancing,” thought Hugh. “What fools to make such an exhibition
here where a boat may pass at any moment! Ohrante is certainly insane or
very sure he is invincible. It is time we finished our work.”

He missed Blaise from his side, and crept down to the remaining canoe,
supposing his younger brother had gone that way. Blaise was not there.
Hugh waited several minutes, listening to the grunts and cries, which,
low voiced at first, were growing louder and faster as the dancers warmed
to their work. Suddenly one of them uttered a yell, which was followed by
quite a different sound, an animal’s bellow of rage or pain. Hugh was
both alarmed and curious. What was going on up there, and what had become
of Blaise?

The elder brother crept back across the pebbles, pushed his way
cautiously among the alders, and crawled up a short, steep slope topped
by more bushes and trees, through which the firelight flickered. The
noises of the dance, broken by louder cries and angry bellows, continued.
Crouching low in the shadow, Hugh peeped through at the strangest scene
he had ever looked upon.

In the open space a big fire blazed, casting its reddish-yellow glare
over the picture. Between the fire and the boy, the dancing figures of
the Indians passed back and forth, crouching, stamping, gesticulating, to
the rhythm of their hoarse cries and the clicking of their weapons and
rattles. All were naked to the waist and some entirely so. Their faces
and bodies were streaked and daubed with black and white, yellow and red.
Near by, in dignified immobility, stood the self-styled Chief of Minong,
his tall feather upright in his head band, his face and breast
fantastically painted in black and vermilion. His bronze body was
stripped to the waist, displaying to advantage the breadth of his
shoulders and the great muscles of his long arms. A little shudder passed
down Hugh’s spine as his eyes rested upon that huge, towering form and
the set, cruel face. Yet it was neither the war dance nor Ohrante that
held his surprised gaze longest.

A little to one side of the fire, the tall birch rose straight and high
above its fellows. To its white stem was tied, not a human victim this
time, but the dark form of an animal, a moose. As the beast tossed its
head about in frenzy, Hugh could see that its antlers, still covered with
the fuzzy velvet, had no broad palms and bore but two points on either
side. It was a crotch horn or two year old. Every few moments one or
another of the dancers would utter a yell or war whoop, dart towards the
captive animal, strike it a swift blow with knife, spear or firebrand,
then leap nimbly out of the way of its tossing antlers and flying
forefeet. A favorite sport seemed to be to strike the beast upon the
sensitive end of the nose with a burning pole. The moose was wild with
rage and pain, plunging madly about, swaying the birch almost to
breaking. The bonds were strong and the tree failed to snap, yet the boy
wondered how long it would be before something gave and freed the
frenzied beast. He thought the young moose did not realize his own
strength, but when he should find it out, Hugh did not want to be in the
way.

The watcher was just about to retreat to the beach, when the dancing
suddenly stopped. Drops of rain were beginning to fall, but the shower
was not the reason for the cessation of the dancing. Ohrante had raised
his arm in an impressive gesture. The dancers lowered their weapons and
rattles and drew back to the other side of the fire. Majestically Ohrante
stalked forward and confronted the plunging moose. Lightning flashed,
thunder pealed, there came a sharp dash of rain, the fire hissing and
spitting like a live thing as the drops struck it. But Ohrante did not
intend to be deprived of his cruel sport by a mere thunder shower. He
held in his right hand a long pole with a knife lashed to the end.
Standing just out of reach of the enraged beast’s antlers and forefeet,
he lunged directly at its throat.

There came a dazzling flash, a flare of light, a stunning crash that
seemed to shatter Hugh’s ear-drums. Even as the flash blinded his eyes,
they received a momentary impression of a great black object hurtling at
and over the giant Indian, as he toppled backward into the fire. The next
instant a huge bulk crashed through the bushes almost on top of the boy.
A tremendous splash followed.




                                 XXXVI
                     HOW BLAISE MISSED HIS REVENGE


The rain came down in torrents. Thunder pealed and crashed, and Hugh, a
roaring in his head, his whole body shaking convulsively, lay on his face
among the bushes. A hand seized his shoulder and instantly he came to
himself. He started up and reached for the knife he had borrowed from
Baptiste, then knew it was his half-brother who was speaking.

“Quick,” Blaise whispered. “Follow me close.”

The rain was lessening, the thunder peals were not so deafening. From the
beach below came the sound of voices. With bitterness, Hugh realized that
he and Blaise had delayed too long. The Indians had reached the one canoe
and had discovered that the other was missing.

“They are going to get away. We must do something to stop Ohrante at
least.”

“Ohrante is stopped, I think,” Blaise replied quietly. “I go to see.” And
he wriggled through the dripping bushes.

Hugh followed close on his younger brother’s heels. Out from the shelter
of the trees into the open space the two crawled. Where the fire had
blazed there was now only smoke. A flash of lightning illuminated the
spot. It seemed utterly deserted except for one motionless form. Without
hesitation the brothers crept across the open, no longer single file, but
side by side. The thing they had caught sight of when the lightning
flashed, lay outstretched and partly hidden by the cloud of smoke from
the quenched fire. As they drew near, there was another bright flash.
There lay the giant figure of Ohrante the Mohawk, his head among the
blackened embers, his broad chest battered to a shapeless mass by the
sharp fore hooves of the frenzied moose. Hugh was glad that the flash of
light lasted but an instant. The merciful darkness blotted out the
horrible sight. He turned away sickened.

The report of a musket, another and another, shouts and yells and
splashings, came from the channel between island and mainland.

“The men from the Grand Portage,” cried Hugh. “They have come just in
time. Not all of Ohrante’s rascals will escape.”

He ran down the open lane, Blaise after him. The flashes and reports, the
shouts and cries, proved that a battle was on. The black shapes of canoes
filled with men were distinguishable on the water. A pale flash of the
now distant lightning revealed to the lads one craft close in shore. It
contained but one man.

“Keneu,” Hugh called.

The Indian had seen the boys. He swerved the canoe towards the line of
low bushes at the foot of the gap, and Hugh and Blaise ran out into the
water to step aboard. The yells and musket shots had ceased. The fight
seemed to be over. But another canoe was coming in towards the island
beach. Did that boat hold friends or enemies?

“Holá, Hugh Beaupré,” a familiar voice called. “Where are you?”

“Here, Baptiste, all right, both of us,” Hugh shouted in reply.

“Thank the good God,” Baptiste ejaculated fervently.

The canoe came on and made a landing on the beach. Hugh, Blaise and Keneu
beached their craft near by.

“Did you catch those fellows?” Hugh asked eagerly.

“We sunk their canoe and some are drowned. Others may have reached shore.
The rest of our men have gone over there to search. But where is Ohrante?
We have seen nothing of him. Is he still on this isle?”

“Yes, he is here,” Hugh replied, a little shudder convulsing his body.
“But Ohrante is no longer to be feared.”

“He is dead? Who killed him? One of you?” Baptiste glanced quickly from
one lad to the other.

“No, the victim he was torturing killed him.”

“Another victim? What became of him? Did he escape?”

“He escaped. By now he is probably in safety.”

“Good! Then we have——”

A shout from the top of the island interrupted Baptiste. The other men
from the canoe, who had scattered to search for any of Ohrante’s band who
might be in hiding, had discovered the body. The boys and Baptiste went
up to join them, and Hugh described what he had seen and how the Chief of
Minong had come to his death.

“A frightful fate truly, but he brought it upon himself by torturing the
beast,” the Frenchman exclaimed. “But how was it they had a captive
moose? Surely they did not bring it across from the Isle Royale?”

“No.” It was Blaise who spoke. “Keneu says the men from the mainland
brought the moose. Keneu saw the beast tied to a tree at their camp. It
was a two year old and seemed tame. He thought it had been raised in
captivity. They brought it to kill for a feast. Hugh and I saw it swim
across behind their canoe.”

“Ohrante had no human captive to torture.” Hugh shuddered again,
realizing that he himself had been the intended victim. “He had no man to
practice his cruelty upon, so he used the animal. What a fiend the fellow
was!”

Not one of Ohrante’s band was found on the island. The sudden fall of
their chief had so appalled them that they had fled, every man of them,
to the beach and had crowded into the one remaining canoe. The
explanation of Ohrante’s fate was clear. The lightning had struck the top
of the tall birch. The young moose, already wild with pain and fright,
was driven to utter frenzy by the crash and shock. It had burst its bonds
and plunged straight at its nearest tormentor, knocking him into the
fire, stamping upon his body with its sharp hooves, and then dashing for
the lake and freedom. A terrible revenge the crotch horn had taken.

Hugh’s plan had been to sink one canoe and steal the other, leaving the
Chief of Minong and his followers marooned on the little island. He had
hoped that the loss of the boats would not be discovered before morning.
Then the besieging party could demand the surrender of Ohrante, promising
his followers, if necessary, that they should go free if they would
deliver up their chief. Even if they refused, there seemed no chance for
Ohrante to get away. Before he could build canoes, the attacking party
could easily raise a force sufficient to rush the island. If members of
the band should attempt to swim the channel or cross it on a raft, they
would be at the mercy of the besiegers. Sooner or later the giant and his
men would be compelled to yield.

In accordance with this plan, the boys had set out to make away with
Ohrante’s canoes. When ample time to carry out the manœuvre had passed,
and they did not return, Baptiste had grown anxious. The sounds of the
war dance and the bellows of the captive moose, carrying across the
water, had increased his alarm. The men from the Grand Portage arriving
just before the storm broke, Baptiste signalled them and they held
themselves in readiness to go to the rescue of the lads. The watchers saw
the lightning strike the island. They heard the tumult as the frightened
Indians, believing some supernatural power had intervened to destroy
their chief, fled to the beach. At once Baptiste’s men, regardless of the
storm, started for the island. A flash of lightning showed them a canoe
crossing to the mainland. Attack followed and the canoe was sunk or
overturned. One boat of the attacking party put into shore to cut off the
flight of any of the band who might succeed in reaching land. The other
turned to the island.

When the whole force came together at dawn, they had taken two prisoners
and had found the dead bodies of two other Indians besides Ohrante. The
Mohawk had brought but three men with him and four others had joined him
at the island. Three were therefore unaccounted for. They might have been
drowned or they might have escaped. The important thing was that Ohrante
was dead and his band broken up.

The headlong flight of the great chief’s followers was explained by one
of the prisoners. The Indians had believed the giant Iroquois invincible.
He had the reputation, as Monga had said, of being a medicine man or
magician of great powers. He claimed to have had, in early youth, a dream
in which it was revealed to him that no human hand would ever strike him
down. The dream explained the boldness and rashness of his behavior. It
also threw light on his fear of powers not human. Suddenly he was felled,
not by human hand indeed, but by the dreadful thunder bird and the hooves
of a beast which surely must be a spirit in disguise. The invincible was
vanquished and his followers were panic stricken. The three men Ohrante
had brought from Minong led the flight. They had seen and heard the
threatening manifestations of Nanibozho, Kepoochikan and their attendant
manitos on that island. Two of the band, the captive said, had been left
on Minong to guard the camp. Of them neither Hugh nor Blaise ever heard
again. Whether the Indians remained on the island or whether after a time
they returned to the mainland and learned of Ohrante’s death, the lads
never knew.

With the fate of the giant Mohawk all the attacking party were well
satisfied except Blaise. He was so glum and silent that Hugh could not
understand what had come over the lad. After their return to the Grand
Portage, Blaise opened his heart.

“I wished to kill our father’s enemy with my own hands,” he confessed to
Hugh. “It was the duty of you or me to avenge him, and I wished for the
honor. You saw not in the darkness that I took my musket with me. When we
crept in the water below that open place, I carried the musket on my back
not to wet it. And then when I knelt among the trees and he stood there
with his arms folded, I had him in good range. But, my brother, I could
not shoot. It was not that I feared for myself or you. No, I felt no
fear. I could not shoot him unarmed and with no chance to fight for his
life. I am a fool, a coward, a disgrace to the Ojibwa nation.”

“No, no, you are nothing of the kind,” Hugh cried indignantly. “There is
no braver lad anywhere. You are no coward, you are a white man, Blaise,
and an honorable one. That is why you couldn’t shoot Ohrante in the back
from ambush. I know there are white men who do such things and feel no
shame. But would father have done it, do you think? Would he?”

A little anxiously, Hugh waited for the answer. He had known his father
so little, and Jean Beaupré had lived long among savages. The reply came
at last, slowly and thoughtfully.

“No,” said the younger son, “no, our father would never have shot a man
in the back.”




                                 XXXVII
                          THE PACKET IS OPENED


With eager curiosity Hugh Beaupré sat watching Monsieur Dubois unwrap the
mysterious packet. The adventurous journey was over. The ex-members of
Ohrante’s band, including Monga, had been turned over to the fur
companies to be dealt with. The pelts had been safely delivered to the
New Northwest Company at the Kaministikwia, Jean Beaupré’s small debt
cancelled, and the rest of the price paid divided between the two boys.
The furs had proved of fine quality, and Hugh was well satisfied with his
share. He had been given a draft on the company’s bankers in Montreal,
who had paid him in gold. Blaise had chosen to take his half in winter
supplies, and, with Hugh and Baptiste to back him, had won the respect of
the company’s clerk as a shrewd bargainer. At the Kaministikwia, the
younger boy had found his mother with a party of her people, and Hugh,
less reluctant than at the beginning of his journey, had made her
acquaintance. Regretfully parting with Blaise, the elder brother had
joined the great canoe fleet returning with the furs. He was able to
qualify as a canoeman, and he had remained with the fleet during the
whole trip to Montreal. Of that interesting but strenuous journey there
is no space to tell here.

One of the lad’s first acts after reaching the city had been to seek out
Monsieur Dubois. Dubois proved to be a prominent man among the French
people of Montreal, and Hugh had found him without difficulty. After
explaining how he had come by the packet, the lad had placed it in the
Frenchman’s hands. He had learned from this thin, grave, white-haired man
that he, René Dubois, had lived in the Indian country for many years.
During the first months of Jean Beaupré’s life in the wild Superior
region, Dubois, though considerably older, had been the friend and
companion of Hugh’s father. When an inheritance had come to him, the
elder man had been called back to Montreal, where he had since lived.
Beaupré, on his infrequent returns to civilization, had made brief calls
on his old comrade, but they had no common business interests and had
never corresponded. Monsieur Dubois was, therefore, at a loss to
understand why Hugh’s father had been so anxious that this packet should
reach him.

He undid the outer wrapping, glanced at his own name on the bark label,
cut the cord, broke the seals and removed the doeskin. Several thin white
sheets of birch bark covered with fine writing in the faint, muddy,
home-made ink, and a small, flat object wrapped in another thin cover of
doeskin, were all the packet contained. When his fingers closed on the
object within the skin cover, the man’s face paled, then flushed. His
hands trembled as he removed the wrapping. For several moments he sat
staring at the little disk of yellow metal, turning it over and over in
his fingers. Why it should affect Monsieur Dubois so strongly Hugh could
not imagine. It was obvious that the white-haired man was trying to
control some strong emotion. Without a word to the boy, he laid the disk
down, and Hugh could see that it was a gold coin. Taking the bark sheets
from the table where he had laid them, Dubois scanned them rapidly, then
turned again to the beginning and read them slowly and intently. When he
raised his eyes, Hugh was surprised to see that they were glistening with
tears. His voice trembled as he spoke.

“You cannot know, Hugh Beaupré, what a great service you have done me. It
is impossible that I can ever repay you. You do not understand, you
cannot, until I explain. But first I would ask you a question or two, if
you will pardon me.”

“Of course,” replied Hugh wonderingly. “I shall be glad to answer
anything that I can, Monsieur Dubois.”

“Well then, about that half-brother of yours, what sort of a lad is he?”

“As fine a lad as you will find anywhere, Monsieur,” Hugh answered
promptly. “When I first received his letter, I was prejudiced against
him, I admit.” He flushed and hesitated.

Dubois nodded understandingly. “But now?” he questioned.

“Now I love him as if he were my _whole_ brother,” Hugh said warmly. “We
went through much together, he saved me from a horrible fate, and I
learned to know him well. A finer, truer-hearted fellow than Blaise never
existed.”

Again Dubois nodded, apparently well satisfied. “And his mother?”

“I was surprised at his mother,” Hugh replied with equal frankness. “She
is Indian, of course, but without doubt a superior sort of Indian. For
one thing she was clean and neatly dressed. She is very good-looking too,
her voice is sweet, her manner quiet, and she certainly treated me
kindly. She loves Blaise dearly, and,—I think—she really loved my
father.”

Once more Monsieur Dubois nodded, a light of pleasure in his dark eyes.
“I asked,” he said abruptly, “because, you see, she is my daughter.”

“Your daughter? But she is an Indian!”

“Only half Indian, but no wonder you are surprised. I will explain.”

Monsieur Dubois then told the wondering boy how, about thirty-eight years
before, when he was still a young man, he had taken to the woods. It was
in the period between the conquest of Canada by the English and the
outbreak of the American Revolution, long before the formation of the
Northwest Fur Company, when the fur traders in the Upper Lakes region
were practically all French Canadians and free lances, each doing
business for himself. In due time, René Dubois, like most of the others,
had married an Indian girl. A daughter was born to them, a pretty baby
who had found a very warm spot in the heart of her adventurous father.
Before she was two years old, however, he lost her. He had left his wife
and child at an Indian village near the south shore of Lake Superior,
while he went on one of his trading trips. On his return he found the
place deserted, the signs plain that it had been raided by some
unfriendly band. There was no law in the Indian country, and in that
period, shortly after the so-called French and Indian War, when the
Algonquin Indians had sided with the French and the Iroquoian with the
English, conditions were more than usually unstable. For years Dubois
tried to trace his wife and daughter or learn their fate, but never
succeeded.

“And now,” he concluded, his voice again trembling with feeling, “you
bring me proof that my daughter still lives, that she was the wife of my
friend, and that in his son and hers I have a grandson and an heir.”
Monsieur Dubois took up the gold coin and handed it to Hugh. One face had
been filed smooth and on it, cut with some crude tool, were the outlines
of a coat-of-arms. “I did that myself,” Dubois explained. “It is the arms
of my family. When the child was born, I made that and hung it about her
neck on a sinew cord.”

“And Blaise’s mother still had it?” exclaimed Hugh.

“No, she had lost it, but your father recovered it. Read the letter
yourself.” He handed Hugh the bark sheets.

It was an amazing letter. Jean Beaupré merely mentioned how he had found
the Indian girl a captive among the Sioux, had bought her, taken her away
and married her. No doubt he had told all this to Dubois before. Beaupré
had not had the slightest suspicion that his wife was other than she
believed herself to be, a full-blooded Ojibwa. She had been brought up by
an Ojibwa couple, but in a Sioux raid her supposed father and mother had
been killed and she had been captured. Nearly two years before the
writing of the letter, Beaupré had happened to receive a gold coin for
some service rendered an official of the Northwest Company. His wife had
examined the coin with interest, and had said that she herself had once
had one nearly like it, the same on one side, she said, but different on
the other. She had always worn it on a cord around her neck, but when she
was captured, a Sioux squaw had taken it from her. At first Beaupré
thought that the thing she had possessed had been one of the little
medals sometimes given by a priest to a baptized child, but she had
insisted that one side of her medal had been like the coin. Then he
remembered that his old comrade Dubois had told of the coin, bearing his
coat-of-arms, worn by his baby daughter. Jean Beaupré said nothing of his
suspicions to his wife, but he resolved to find out, if he could, whether
she was really the daughter of René Dubois. On this quest, he twice
visited the Sioux country west of the Mississippi. The autumn before the
opening of this story, he learned of the whereabouts of the very band
that had held his wife a captive. After sending, by an Indian messenger,
a letter to Hugh at the Sault, asking the boy to wait there until his
father joined him in the spring, Beaupré left at once for the interior.
He was fortunate enough to find the Sioux band and the chief from whom he
had bought the captive more than fifteen years before. The chief,
judiciously bribed and threatened, had sought for the medal and had found
it in the possession of a young girl who said her mother had given it to
her. When Beaupré questioned the old squaw, she admitted that she had
taken the coin from the neck of an Ojibwa captive years before. How the
Ojibwa couple who had brought the girl up had come by her, Beaupré was
unable to find out, but he had no doubt that she was really the daughter
of René Dubois. He resolved to send the proof of his wife’s parentage to
Montreal by his elder son, if Hugh had really come to the Sault and had
waited there. If Hugh was not there, the elder Beaupré would go to the
city himself. It was plain that he had not received either of the letters
Hugh had sent after him, nor had Hugh ever got the one his father had
written him. Fearing that if any accident should happen to him, the coin
and the story might never reach his old comrade, Beaupré had written down
the tale and prepared the packet. Even in his dying condition he
remembered it and told Blaise to go get it. Evidently, when he discovered
he was in danger of falling into Ohrante’s hands, he had feared to keep
the packet with him, so had hidden it with the furs. If he escaped the
giant, he could return for both furs and packet, but if the coin came
into Ohrante’s possession it would be lost forever. The letter, however,
said nothing of all that. It had undoubtedly been written before Beaupré
set out on his home journey.

With deep emotion Hugh deciphered the fine, faint writing on the bark
sheets. He was glad from the bottom of his heart that he and Blaise had
been able to recover the packet and deliver it to the man to whom it
meant so much. If Hugh had had any dreams of some strange fortune coming
to himself through the packet, he forgot them when Monsieur Dubois began
to speak again.

“I shall go to the Kaministikwia at once, if I can find means of reaching
there this autumn. At least I shall go as far as I can and finish the
journey in the spring. Wherever my daughter and my grandson are, I will
seek them out. I have no other heirs and Blaise, my grandson, shall take
the place of a son. I will bring them back to Montreal, or, if that does
not seem best, I will remain in the upper country with them. Whether my
grandson chooses to live his life in civilization or in the wilderness, I
can provide him with the means to make that life both successful and
useful.”

The elder brother’s heart was glowing with happiness. He knew that his
own mother’s people would help him to a start in life, and now his
younger brother, his half-breed,—no, quarter-breed—brother Blaise would
have a chance too. Hugh had no doubt that Blaise Beaupré would make the
most of his opportunities.

It only remains to say that when René Dubois saw the mother of Blaise,
her resemblance to himself and to her own mother thoroughly convinced him
that there had been no mistake. He more than fulfilled to both his
daughter and his grandson the promises Hugh had heard him make.


                                THE END


                  MYSTERY AND ADVENTURE BOOKS FOR BOYS


              _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Colored jackets._
                      _Price 50 cents per volume._
                     _Postage 10 cents additional._

SOUTH FROM HUDSON BAY, by E. C. Brill

        A thrilling tale of the coming of settlers from France and
        Switzerland to the wilderness of the Prairie country of the Red
        River district, and the adventures of three boys who find
        themselves entangled in the fate of the little colony.

THE SECRET CACHE, by E. C. Brill

        The father of two boys, a fur hunter, has been seriously injured
        by an Indian. Before he dies he succeeds in telling the younger
        son about a secret cache of valuable furs. The directions are
        incomplete but the boys start off to find the Cache, and with the
        help of men from a nearby settlement capture the Indian and bring
        him to justice.

THE ISLAND OF YELLOW SANDS, by E. C. Brill

        An exciting story of Adventure in Colonial Days in the primitive
        country around Lake Superior, when the forest and waters were the
        hunting ground of Indians, hunters and trappers.

LOST CITY OF THE AZTECS, by J. A. Lath

        Four chums find a secret code stuck inside the binding of an old
        book written many years ago by a famous geologist. The boys
        finally solve the code and learn of the existence of the remnant
        of a civilized Aztec tribe inside an extinct crater in the
        southern part of Arizona. How they find these Aztecs, and their
        many stirring adventures makes a story of tremendous present-day
        scientific interest that every boy will enjoy.


                        CHAMPION SPORTS STORIES

                         By NOEL SAINSBURY, JR.

_Every boy enjoys sport stories. Here we present three crackerjack
stories of baseball, football, and basketball, written in the vernacular
of the boy of to-day, full of action, suspense and thrills, in language
every boy will understand, and which we know will be enthusiastically
endorsed by all boys._

                _Large 12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket
                  in color. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. CRACKER STANTON _Or The Making of a Batsman_

        Ralph Stanton, big, rawboned and serious, is a product of the
        backwoods and a crack rifle shot. Quick thinking and pluck bring
        him a scholarship to Clarkville School where he is branded
        “grind” and “dub” by classmates. How his batting brings them
        first place in the League and how he secures his appointment to
        West Point make CRACKER STANTON an up-to-the-minute baseball
        story no lover of the game will want to put down until the last
        word is read.

2. GRIDIRON GRIT _Or The Making of a Fullback_

        A corking story of football packed full of exciting action and
        good, clean competitive rivalry. Shorty Fiske is six-foot-four
        and the product of too much money and indulgence at home. How
        Clarkville School and football develop Shorty’s real character
        and how he eventually stars on the gridiron brings this thrilling
        tale of school life and football to a grandstand finish.

3. THE FIGHTING FIVE _Or the Kidnapping of Clarkville’s Basketball Team_

        Clarkville School’s basketball team is kidnapped during the game
        for the State Scholastic Championship. The team’s subsequent
        adventures under the leadership of Captain Charlie Minor as he
        brings them back to the State College Gymnasium where the two
        last quarters of the Championship game are played next evening,
        climaxes twenty-four pulsating hours of adventure and basketball
        in the FIGHTING FIVE...


                          SORAK JUNGLE SERIES

                         By HARVEY D. RICHARDS

_The name Sorak means War Cry in the Malay country. He grows up among the
most primitive of the Malay aborigines, and learns to combat all the
terrors of the jungle with safety. The constant battle with nature’s
forces develop Sorak’s abilities to such an extent that he is
acknowledged the chief warrior in all his section of the jungle._

                  _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in
                   color. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. SORAK OF THE MALAY JUNGLE _or How Two Young Americans Face Death and
        Win a Friend_

        Two boys, Dick and Jack Preston are shipwrecked off the Malay
        Peninsula and are rescued by Sorak. Their adventures in trying to
        get back to civilization make an absorbing story.

2. SORAK AND THE CLOUDED TIGER _or How the Terrible Ruler of the North Is
        Hunted and Destroyed_

        A huge clouded tiger, almost human, leads a pack of red dholes
        into Sorak’s country, and it takes all of Sorak’s ingenuity, and
        the aid of his friends to exterminate the pack.

3. SORAK AND THE SULTAN’S ANKUS _or How a Perilous Journey Leads to a
        Kingdom of Giants_

        Sorak and his friends are trapped by a herd of elephants, and
        finally run away with by the leader to an unknown valley where a
        remnant of Cro-Magnan race still exists. Their exciting
        adventures will hold the reader enthralled until the last word.

4. SORAK AND THE TREE-MEN _or the Rescue of the Prisoner Queen_

        Captured by a band of Malay slavers, Sorak and his friends are
        wrecked on an island off the coast of Burma in the Mergui
        Archipelago. Their escape from the island with the Prisoner Queen
        after a successful revolution brings the fourth book of this
        series to an exciting and unusual conclusion.


                      TOP NOTCH DETECTIVE STORIES

                            By WILLIAM HALL

                    _Each story complete in itself_

_A new group of detective stories carefully written, with corking plots;
modern, exciting, full of adventure, good police and detective work._

                _Large 12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket
                  in color. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. SLOW VENGEANCE _or the Mystery of Pete Shine_

        A young newspaper man, whose brother is on the police force,
        becomes strangely involved in the mysterious killing of an
        Italian bootblack. Suspicion points to a well-known politician
        but he proves that it was impossible for him to have done the
        deed. Then the reporter, who for a time turns detective, gets a
        clue revolving about a startling, ancient method of combat. He
        follows this up, watches a masked duelist and, with the help of a
        girl, catches the murderer who justifies his deed on the plea of
        Slow Vengeance. You will be interested in reading how the
        reporter got out of a tight corner.

2. GREEN FIRE _or Mystery of the Indian Diamond_

        A golf caddy who has a leaning toward amateur detective work,
        together with his younger cousin, are accidentally mixed up in
        the strange loss, or theft, of a valuable diamond, known as Green
        Fire. It was once the eye of an East Indian idol. To clear his
        young cousin of suspicion, the older boy undertakes to solve the
        mystery which deepens when one man disappears and another is
        found murdered on the golf course. But, by a series of clever
        moves on the part of the young sleuth, the crime is solved and
        the diamond found in a most unusual hiding place. A rapidly
        moving, exciting tale. You will like it.

3. HIDDEN DANGER _or The Secret of the Bank Vault_

        A young detective, who, in his private capacity, has solved
        several mysteries, decides to open an office in another city. He
        meets a young bank clerk and they become partners just when the
        clerk’s bank is mysteriously bombed and the cashier is reported
        missing. It is not until next day that it is discovered that the
        bank vault has been entered in some secret manner and a large sum
        stolen. The regular detectives declared “spirits” must have
        robbed the bank but the two young detectives prove that a clever
        gang did it and also kidnapped the aged cashier. Not a dull page
        from first to last. A clever story.


                           NORTHWEST STORIES

                           By LeROY W. SNELL

_A new group of stories laid in the Canadian Northwest by Mr. Snell, a
master writer of the glories and the thrilling adventures of the Canadian
Northwest Mounted Police. Each book is an individual story, well written,
beautifully bound, and contains a story that all boys will enjoy._

                _Large 12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket
                  in color. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. THE LEAD DISK

        Tom Baley, leaving college goes north into Canada, hoping to join
        the Northwest Mounted Police. His application is turned down by
        his own uncle, an officer on the force, but after many thrilling
        adventures and encounters with the Disk Gang he is able to win
        the coveted uniform.

2. SHADOW PATROL

        Luke Myers is sent into the Caribou Mountains to solve the
        mystery of The Shadow, about whom many conflicting stories are
        told. There are struggles with the outlaws, and finally a great
        running battle down the fog-obscured mountain trails ... at the
        end of which the outlaws are captured and the mystery of The
        Shadow is solved.

3. THE WOLF CRY

        Donald Pierce is sent to solve the mystery of his father’s
        disappearance, into the unmapped barrens where King Stively
        weaves his web of wickedness, and rules a territory the size of a
        small empire with a ruthlessness and cunning that baffles the
        best of the Mounted Police. Behind all is the dread Wolf Cry
        which causes brave men to shudder....

4. THE SPELL OF THE NORTH

        Sergeant David Stanlaw, stationed at Spirit River, is puzzled by
        a local killing, the disappearance of the body, the finding of a
        code message, and by the mystery of the “Listening Forest,” which
        casts a shadow of dread over the little town of Wiggin’s Creek.
        With the help of Jerry Bartlett they capture the leaders of the
        gang and solve the mystery of the “Listening Forest.”

5. THE CHALLENGE OF THE YUKON

        Robert Wade whose patrol runs from Skagway on Chattam Strait
        north into the Yukon country follows in the wake of a stampede to
        a new gold strike. With the aid of his friend, Jim MacPhail, Wade
        frustrates the outlaws, who try to trap the whole town behind the
        “Pass of the Closing Door,” and then races them to and across the
        breaking ice floes of the Yukon. A strong adventure story all
        boys will enjoy.


                            THE BOMBA BOOKS

                            By ROY ROCKWOOD

            _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. With Colored jacket.
        Price 50 cents per volume. Postage 10 cents additional._

_Bomba lived far back in the jungles of the Amazon with a half-demented
naturalist who told the lad nothing of his past. The jungle boy was a
lover of birds, and hunted animals with a bow and arrow and his trusty
machete. He had only a primitive education, and his daring adventures
will be followed with breathless interest by thousands._

  1. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY
  2. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AT THE MOVING MOUNTAIN
  3. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AT THE GIANT CATARACT
  4. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY ON JAGUAR ISLAND
  5. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY IN THE ABANDONED CITY
  6. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY ON TERROR TRAIL
  7. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY IN THE SWAMP OF DEATH
  8. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AMONG THE SLAVES
  9. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY ON THE UNDERGROUND RIVER
  10. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE LOST EXPLORERS
  11. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY IN A STRANGE LAND
  12. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AMONG THE PYGMIES
  13. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE CANNIBALS
  14. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE PAINTED HUNTERS
  15. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE RIVER DEMONS
  16. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE HOSTILE CHIEFTAIN


                        THE BASEBALL JOE SERIES

                           By LESTER CHADWICK

             _12mo. Illustrated. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. BASEBALL JOE OF THE SILVER STARS _or The Rivals of Riverside_

2. BASEBALL JOE ON THE SCHOOL NINE _or Pitching for the Blue Banner_

3. BASEBALL JOE AT YALE _or Pitching for the College Championship_

4. BASEBALL JOE IN THE CENTRAL LEAGUE _or Making Good as a Professional
        Pitcher_

5. BASEBALL JOE IN THE BIG LEAGUE _or A Young Pitcher’s Hardest
        Struggles_

6. BASEBALL JOE ON THE GIANTS _or Making Good as a Twirler in the
        Metropolis_

7. BASEBALL JOE IN THE WORLD SERIES _or Pitching for the Championship_

8. BASEBALL JOE AROUND THE WORLD _or Pitching on a Grand Tour_

9. BASEBALL JOE: HOME RUN KING _or The Greatest Pitcher and Batter on
        Record_

10. BASEBALL JOE SAVING THE LEAGUE _or Breaking Up a Great Conspiracy_

11. BASEBALL JOE CAPTAIN OF THE TEAM _or Bitter Struggles on the Diamond_

12. BASEBALL JOE CHAMPION OF THE LEAGUE _or The Record that was Worth
        While_

13. BASEBALL JOE CLUB OWNER _or Putting the Home Town on the Map_

14. BASEBALL JOE PITCHING WIZARD _or Triumphs Off and On the Diamond_


                       ADVENTURE STORIES FOR BOYS

                          By JOHN GABRIEL ROWE


               _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Colored Jacket.
                       Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

_Every boy who knows the lure of exploring and who loves to rig up huts
and caves and tree-houses to fortify himself against imaginary enemies
will enjoy these books, for they give a vivid chronicle of the doings and
inventions of a group of boys who are shipwrecked and have to make
themselves snug and safe in tropical islands where the dangers are too
real for play._

1. CRUSOE ISLAND

        Dick, Alf and Fred find themselves stranded on an unknown island
        with the old seaman Josh, their ship destroyed by fire, their
        friends lost.

2. THE ISLAND TREASURE

        With much ingenuity these boys fit themselves into the wild life
        of the island they are cast upon after a storm.

3. THE MYSTERY OF THE DERELICT

        Their ship and companions perished in tempest at sea, the boys
        are adrift in a small open boat when they spy a ship. Such a
        strange vessel!—no hand guiding it, no soul on board,—a derelict

4. THE LIGHTSHIP PIRATES

        Modern Pirates, with the ferocity of beasts, attack a lightship
        crew;—recounting the adventures that befall the survivors of that
        crew—and—“RETRIBUTION.”

5. THE SECRET OF THE GOLDEN IDOL

        Telling of a mutiny, and how two youngsters were unwillingly
        involved in one of the weirdest of treasure hunts,—and—“THE
        GOLDEN FETISH.”

6. SERGEANT DICK

        The Canadian Northwest police has the reputation of always
        getting their man, and Sergeant Dick upholds the tradition in a
        story of great adventure.

7. THE CARCAJOU (kärcájöu)

        A sequel to Sergeant Dick, with the Carcajou proving his worth in
        a series of adventures that will hold the interest of any boy.


          These books may be purchased wherever books are sold
               _Send for Our Free Illustrated Catalogue_


             CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers    New York




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original printed text—this e-text
  is public domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Secret Cache, by E. C. [Ethel Claire] Brill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET CACHE ***

***** This file should be named 43293-0.txt or 43293-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/2/9/43293/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Rod Crawford, Dave Morgan
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Andrew Marvell, by Augustine Birrell


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Andrew Marvell


Author: Augustine Birrell



Release Date: December 25, 2005  [eBook #17388]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANDREW MARVELL***


E-text prepared by Irma Spehar, Louise Pryor, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/) from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/toronto)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/andrewmarvell00birruoft

      The caret character (^) indicates that the remainder of the word
      is superscripted.
      Italicized words or phrases are placed between underscore (_)
      marks.





English Men of Letters
Edited by John Morley

ANDREW MARVELL

by

AUGUSTINE BIRRELL







New York
The MacMillan Company
London: MacMillan & Co., Ltd.
1905
All rights reserved
Copyright, 1905,
By the MacMillan Company.

Set up and electrotyped. Published September, 1905.
Norwood Press
J.S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.





PREFACE


I desire to express my indebtedness to the following editions of
Marvell's Works:--

   (1) _The Works of Andrew Marvell, Esq., Poetical, Controversial, and
       Political_: containing many Original Letters, Poems, and Tracts
       never before printed, with a New Life. By Captain Edward
       Thompson. In three volumes. London, 1776.

   (2) _The Complete Works in Verse and Prose of Andrew Marvell, M.P._
       Edited with Memorial-Introduction and Notes by the Rev. Alexander
       B. Grosart. In four volumes. 1872.

       (_In the Fuller Worthies Library._)

   (3) _Poems and Satires of Andrew Marvell, sometime Member of
       Parliament for Hull._ Edited by G.A. Aitken. Two volumes.
       Lawrence and Bullen, 1892.

       _Reprinted_ Routledge, 1905.

Mr. C.H. Firth's Life of Marvell in the thirty-sixth volume of _The
Dictionary of National Biography_ has, I am sure, preserved me from
some, and possibly from many, blunders.

                                                         A.B.

3 NEW SQUARE, LINCOLN'S INN,
            June 3, 1905.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I
                                                  PAGE
EARLY DAYS AT SCHOOL AND COLLEGE                    1


CHAPTER II

"THE HAPPY GARDEN-STATE"                           19


CHAPTER III

A CIVIL SERVANT IN THE TIME OF THE COMMONWEALTH    48


CHAPTER IV

IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS                            75


CHAPTER V

"THE REHEARSAL TRANSPROSED"                       151


CHAPTER VI

LAST YEARS IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS                179


CHAPTER VII

FINAL SATIRES AND DEATH                           211


CHAPTER VIII

WORK AS A MAN OF LETTERS                          225


INDEX                                             233




ANDREW MARVELL




CHAPTER I

EARLY DAYS AT SCHOOL AND COLLEGE


The name of Andrew Marvell ever sounds sweet, and always has, to use
words of Charles Lamb's, a fine relish to the ear. As the author of
poetry of exquisite quality, where for the last time may be heard the
priceless note of the Elizabethan lyricist, whilst at the same moment
utterance is being given to thoughts and feelings which reach far
forward to Wordsworth and Shelley, Marvell can never be forgotten in his
native England.

Lines of Marvell's poetry have secured the final honours, and incurred
the peril, of becoming "familiar quotations" ready for use on a great
variety of occasion. We may, perhaps, have been bidden once or twice too
often to remember how the Royal actor

    "Nothing common did, or mean,
     Upon that memorable scene,"

or have been assured to our surprise by some self-satisfied worldling
how he always hears at his back,

    "Time's wingèd chariot hurrying near."

A true poet can, however, never be defiled by the rough usage of the
populace.

As a politician Marvell lives in the old-fashioned vivacious
history-books (which if they die out, as they show some signs of doing,
will carry with them half the historic sense of the nation) as the hero
of an anecdote of an unsuccessful attempt made upon his political virtue
by a minister of the Crown, as a rare type of an inflexible patriot, and
as the last member of the House of Commons who was content to take wages
from, instead of contributing to the support of, his constituents. As
the intimate friend and colleague of Milton, Marvell shares some of the
indescribable majesty of that throne. A poet, a scholar, a traveller, a
diplomat, a famous wit, an active member of Parliament from the
Restoration to his death in 1678, the life of Andrew Marvell might _a
priori_ be supposed to be one easy to write, at all events after the
fashion in which men's lives get written. But it is nothing of the kind,
as many can testify. A more elusive, non-recorded character is hardly to
be found. We know all about him, but very little of him. His parentage,
his places of education, many of his friends and acquaintances, are all
known. He wrote nearly four hundred letters to his Hull constituents,
carefully preserved by the Corporation, in which he narrates with much
particularity the course of public business at Westminster.
Notwithstanding these materials, the man Andrew Marvell remains
undiscovered. He rarely comes to the surface. Though both an author and
a member of Parliament, not a trace of personal vanity is noticeable,
and vanity is a quality of great assistance to the biographer. That
Marvell was a strong, shrewd, capable man of affairs, with enormous
powers of self-repression, his Hull correspondence clearly proves, but
what more he was it is hard to say. He rarely spoke during his eighteen
years in the House of Commons. It is impossible to doubt that such a
man in such a place was, in Mr. Disraeli's phrase, a "personage." Yet
when we look for recognition of what we feel sure was the fact, we fail
to find it. Bishop Burnet, in his delightful history, supplies us with
sketches of the leading Parliamentarians of Marvell's day, yet to
Marvell himself he refers but once, and then not by name but as "the
liveliest droll of the age," words which mean much but tell little. In
Clarendon's _Autobiography_, another book which lets the reader into the
very clash and crowd of life, there is no mention of one of the author's
most bitter and cruel enemies. With Prince Rupert, Marvell was credited
by his contemporaries with a great intimacy; he was a friend of
Harrington's; it may be he was a member of the once famous "Rota" Club;
it is impossible to resist the conviction that wherever he went he made
a great impression, that he was a central figure in the lobbies of the
House of Commons and a man of much account; yet no record survives
either to convince posterity of his social charm or even to convey any
exact notion of his personal character.

A somewhat solitary man he would appear to have been, though fond of
occasional jollity. He lived alone in lodgings, and was much immersed in
business, about a good deal of which we know nothing except that it took
him abroad. His death was sudden, and when three years afterwards the
first edition of his poems made its appearance, it was prefaced by a
certificate signed "Mary Marvell," to the effect that everything in the
book was printed "according to the copies of my late dear husband."
Until after Marvell's death we never hear of Mrs. Marvell, and with this
signed certificate she disappears. In a series of Lives of Poets' Wives
it would be hard to make much of Mrs. Andrew Marvell. For different but
still cogent reasons it is hard to write a life of her famous husband.

Andrew Marvell was born at Winestead in Holdernesse, on Easter Eve, the
31st of March 1621, in the Rectory House, the elder Marvell, also
Andrew, being then the parson of the parish. No fitter birthplace for a
garden-poet can be imagined. Roses still riot in Winestead; the
fruit-tree roots are as mossy as in the seventeenth century. At the
right season you may still

    "Through the hazels thick espy
    The hatching throstle's shining eye."

Birds, fruits and flowers, woods, gardens, meads, and rivers still make
the poet's birthplace lovely.

    "Loveliness, magic, and grace,
    They are here--they are set in the world!
    They abide! and the finest of souls
    Has not been thrilled by them all,
    Nor the dullest been dead to them quite.
    The poet who sings them may die,
    But they are immortal and live,
    For they are the life of the world."

Holdernesse was not the original home of the Marvells, who would seem to
have been mostly Cambridgeshire folk, though the name crops up in other
counties. Whether Cambridge "men" of a studious turn still take long
walks I do not know, but "some vast amount of years ago" it was
considered a pleasant excursion, either on foot or on a hired steed,
from Cambridge to Meldreth, where the Elizabethan manor-house, long
known as "the Marvells'," agreeably embodied the tradition that here it
was that the poet's father was born in 1586. The Church Registers have
disappeared. Proof is impossible. That there were Marvells in the
neighbourhood is certain. The famous Cambridge antiquary, William Cole,
perhaps the greatest of all our collectors, has included among his
copies of early wills those of several Marvells and Mervells of Meldreth
and Shepreth, belonging to pre-Reformation times, as their pious gifts
to the "High Altar" and to "Our Lady's Light" pleasingly testify. But
our Andrew was a determined Protestant.

The poet's father is an interesting figure in our Church history.
Educated at Emmanuel College, from whence he proceeded a Master of Arts
in 1608, he took Orders; and after serving as curate at Flamborough, was
inducted to the living of Winestead in 1614, where he remained till
1624, in which year he went to Hull as master of the Grammar School and
lecturer, that is preacher, of Trinity Church. The elder Marvell
belonged, from the beginning to the end of his useful and even heroic
life, to the Reformed Church of England, or, as his son puts it, "a
conformist to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, though
I confess none of the most over-running and eager in them." The younger
Marvell, with one boyish interval, belonged all through his life to the
paternal school of religious thought.

Fuller's account of the elder Marvell is too good to be passed over:--

   "He afterwards became Minister at Hull, where for his lifetime he was
   well beloved. Most facetious in discourse, yet grave in his carriage,
   a most excellent preacher who, like a good husband, never broached
   what he had new brewed, but preached what he had pre-studied some
   competent time before. Insomuch that he was wont to say that he would
   cross the common proverb which called Saturday the working-day and
   Monday the holyday of preachers. It happened that Anno Dom. 1640,
   Jan. 23, crossing Humber in a Barrow boat, the same was sandwarpt,
   and he was drowned therein (with Mrs. Skinner, daughter to Sir Edward
   Coke, a very religious gentlewoman) by the carelessness, not to say
   drunkenness of the boatmen, to the great grief of all good men. His
   excellent comment upon St. Peter is daily desired and expected, if
   the envy and covetousness of private persons _for their own use_
   deprive not the public of the benefit thereof."[6:1]

This good man, to whom perhaps, remembering the date of his death, the
words may apply, _Tu vero felix non vitæ tantum claritate sed etiam
opportunitate mortis_, was married at Cherry Burton, on the 22nd of
October 1612, to Anne Pease, a member of a family destined to become
widely known throughout the north of England. Of this marriage there
were five children, all born at Winestead, viz. three daughters, Anne,
Mary, and Elizabeth, and two sons, Andrew and John, the latter of whom
died a year after his birth, and was buried at Winestead on the 20th
September 1624.

The three daughters married respectively James Blaydes of Sutton,
Yorkshire, on the 29th of December 1633; Edmund Popple, afterwards
Sheriff of Hull, on the 18th of August 1636; and Robert More. Anne's
eldest son, Joseph Blaydes, was Mayor of Hull in 1702, having married
the daughter of a preceding Mayor in 1698. The descendants of this
branch still flourish. The Popples also had children, one of whom,
William Popple, was a correspondent of his uncle the poet's, and a
merchant of repute, who became in 1696 Secretary to the Board of Trade,
and the friend of the most famous man who ever sat at the table of that
Board, John Locke. A son of this William Popple led a very comfortable
eighteenth-century life, which is in strong contrast with that of his
grand-uncle, for, having entered the Cofferers' Office about 1730, he
was made seven years later Solicitor and Clerk of the Reports to the
Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, and in 1745 became in
succession to a relative, one Alured Popple, Governor of the Bermudas, a
post he retained until his death, which occurred not

    "Where the remote Bermudas ride
     In the ocean's bosom unespied,"

but at his house in Hampstead. So well placed and idle a gentleman was
almost bound to be a bad poet and worse dramatist, and this William
Popple was both.

Marvell's third sister, Elizabeth, does not seem to have had issue, a
certain Thomas More, or Moore, a Fellow of Magdalen College, Cambridge,
whose name occurs in family records, being her stepson.

In the latter part of 1624 the elder Marvell resigned the living of
Winestead, and took up the duties of schoolmaster and lecturer, or
preacher, at Hull. Important duties they were, for the old Grammar
School of Hull dates back to 1486, and may boast of a long career of
usefulness, never having fallen into that condition of decay and
disrepute from which so many similar endowments have been of late years
rescued by the beneficent and, of course, abused action of the Charity
Commissioners. Andrew Marvell the elder succeeded to and was succeeded
by eminent headmasters. Trinity Church, where the poet's father preached
on Sundays to crowded and interested congregations, was then what it
still is, though restored by Scott, one of the great churches in the
north of England.

The Rev. Andrew Marvell made his mark upon Hull. Mr. Grosart, who lacked
nothing but the curb upon a too exuberant vocabulary, a little less
enthusiasm and a great deal more discretion, to be a model editor, tells
us in his invaluable edition of _The Complete Works in Verse and Prose
of Andrew Marvell, M.P._,[8:1] that he had read a number of the elder
Marvell's manuscripts, consisting of sermons and miscellaneous papers,
from which Mr. Grosart proceeds:--

   "I gather three things.

   "(1) That he was a man of a very brave, fearlessly outspoken
   character. Some of his practical applications in his sermons before
   the Magistrates are daring in their directness of reproof, and
   melting in their wistfulness of entreaty.

   "(2) That he was a well-read man. His Sermons are as full of
   classical and patristic allusions and pat sayings from the most
   occult literatures as even Bishop Andrewes.

   "(3) That he was a man of tireless activity. Besides the two offices
   named, he became head of one of the Great Hospitals of the Town
   (Charter House), and in an address to the Governors placed before
   them a prescient and statesmanlike plan for the better management of
   its revenues, and for the foundation of a Free Public Library to be
   accessible to all."

When at a later day, and in the midst of a fierce controversy, Andrew
Marvell wrote of the clergy as "the reserve of our Christianity," he
doubtless had such men as his father in his mind and memory.

It was at the old Grammar School of Hull, and with his father as his
_Orbilius_, that Marvell was initiated into the mysteries of the Latin
grammar, and was, as he tells us, put to his

      "Montibus, inquit, erunt; et erant submontibus illis;
      Risit Atlantiades; et me mihi, perfide, prodis?
      Me mihi prodis? ait.

   "For as I remember this scanning was a liberal art that we learn'd at
   Grammar School, and to scan verses as he does the Author's prose
   before we did or were obliged to understand them."[8:2]

Irrational methods have often amazingly good results, and the Hull
Grammar School provided its head-master's only son with the rudiments of
learning, thus enabling him to become in after years what John Milton
himself, the author of that terrible _Treatise on Education_ addressed
to Mr. Hartlibb, affirmed Andrew Marvell to be in a written testimonial,
"a scholar, and well-read in the Latin and Greek authors."

Attached to the Grammar School there was "a great garden," renowned for
its wall-fruit and flowers; so by leaving Winestead behind, our
"garden-poet," that was to be, was not deprived of inspiration.

Apart from these meagre facts, we know nothing of Marvell's boyhood at
Hull. His clerical foe, Dr. Parker, afterwards Bishop of Oxford, writes
contemptuously of "an hunger-starved whelp of a country vicar," and in
another passage, which undoubtedly refers to Marvell, he speaks of "an
unhappy education among Boatswains and Cabin-boys," whose unsavoury
phrases, he goes on to suggest, Marvell picked up in his childhood. But
truth need not be looked for in controversial pages. The best argument
for a married clergy is to be found, for Englishmen at all events, in
the sixty-seven volumes of the _Dictionary of National Biography_, where
are recorded the services rendered to religion, philosophy, poetry,
justice, and the empire by the "whelps" of many a country vicar.
Parsons' wives may sometimes be trying and hard to explain, but an
England without the sons of her clergy would be shorn of half her glory.

Marvell's boyhood seems to have been surrounded with the things that
most make for a child's happiness. A sensible, affectionate, humorous,
religious father, occupying a position of authority, and greatly
respected, a mother and three elder sisters to make much of his bright
wit and early adventures, a comfortable yet simple home, and an
atmosphere of piety, learning, and good fellowship. What more is wanted,
or can be desired? The "Boatswains" and "Cabin-boys" of Bishop Parker's
fancy were in the neighbourhood, no doubt, and as stray companions for a
half-holiday must have had their attractions; but it is unnecessary to
attribute Andrew Marvell's style in controversy to his early
acquaintance with a sea-faring population, for he is far more likely to
have picked it up from his great friend and colleague, the author of
_Paradise Lost_.

Marvell's school education over, he went up to Cambridge, not to his
father's old college, but to the more splendid foundation of Trinity.
About the date of his matriculation there is a doubt. In Wood's _Athenæ
Oxonienses_ there is a note to the effect that Marvell was admitted "in
matriculam Acad. Cant. Coll. Trin." on the 14th of December 1633, when
the boy was but twelve years old. Dr. Lort, a famous master of Trinity
in his day, writing in November 1765 to Captain Edward Thompson, of whom
more later on, told the captain that until 1635 there was no register of
admissions of ordinary students, or pensioners, as they are called, but
only a register of Fellows and Foundation Scholars, and in this
last-named register Marvell's name appears as a Scholar sworn and
admitted on the 13th of April 1638. As, however, Marvell took his B.A.
degree in 1639, he must have been in residence long before April 1638.
Probably Marvell went to Trinity about 1635, just before the register of
pensioners was begun, as a pensioner, becoming a Scholar in 1638, and
taking his degree in 1639.

Cambridge undergraduates do not usually keep diaries, nor after they
have become Masters of Art are they much in the habit of giving details
as to their academic career. Marvell is no exception to this provoking
rule. He nowhere tells us what his University taught him or how. The
logic of the schools he had no choice but to learn. Molineus, Peter
Ramus, Seton, Keckerman were text-books of reputation, from one or
another of which every Cambridge man had to master his _simpliciters_,
his _quids_, his _secundum quids_, his _quales_, and his _quantums_.
Aristotle's Physics, Ethics, and Politics were "tutor's books," and
those young men who loved to hear themselves talk were left free to
discuss, much to Hobbes's disgust, "the freedom of the will, incorporeal
substance, everlasting nows, ubiquities, hypostases, which the people
understand not nor will ever care for."

In the life of Matthew Robinson,[11:1] who went up to Cambridge a little
later than Marvell (June 1645), and was probably a harder reader, we are
told that "the strength of his studies lay in the metaphysics and in
those subtle authors for many years which rendered him an irrefragable
disputant _de quolibet ente_, and whilst he was but senior freshman he
was found in the bachelor schools, disputing ably with the best of the
senior sophisters." Robinson despised the old-fashioned Ethics and
Physics, but with the new Cartesian or Experimental Philosophy he was
_inter primos_. History, particularly the Roman, was in great favour at
both Universities at this time, and young men were taught, so old Hobbes
again grumbles, to despise monarchy "from Cicero, Seneca, Cato and other
politicians of Rome, and Aristotle of Athens, who seldom spake of kings
but as of wolves and other ravenous beasts."[12:1] The Muses were never
neglected at Cambridge, as the University exercises survive to prove,
whilst modern languages, Spanish and Italian for example, were greedily
acquired by such an eager spirit as Richard Crashaw, the poet, who came
into residence at Pembroke in 1631. There were problems to be "kept" in
the college chapel, lectures to be attended, both public and private,
declamations to be delivered, and even in the vacations the scholars
were not exempt from "exercises" either in hall or in their tutors'
rooms. Earnest students read their Greek Testaments, and even their
Hebrew Bibles, and filled their note-books, working more hours a day
than was good for their health, whilst the idle ones wasted their time
as best they could in an unhealthy, over-crowded town, in an age which
knew nothing of boating, billiards, or cricket. A tennis-court there was
in Marvell's time, for in Dr. Worthington's _Diary_, under date 3rd of
April 1637, it stands recorded that on that day and in that place that
learned man received "a dangerous blow on the Eye."[12:2]

The only incident we know of Marvell's undergraduate days is remarkable
enough, for, boy though he was, he seems, like the Gibbon of a later
day, to have suddenly become a Roman Catholic. This occurrence may serve
to remind us how, during Marvell's time at Trinity, the University of
Cambridge (ever the precursor in thought-movements) had a Catholic
revival of her own, akin to that one which two hundred years afterwards
happened at Oxford, and has left so much agreeable literature behind it.
Fuller in his history of the University of Cambridge tells us a little
about this highly interesting and important movement:--

   "Now began the University (1633-4) to be much beautified in
   buildings, every college either casting its skin with the snake, or
   renewing its bill with the eagle, having their courts or at least
   their fronts and Gatehouses repaired and adorned. But the greatest
   alteration was in their Chapels, most of them being graced with the
   accession of organs. And seeing musick is one of the liberal arts,
   how could it be quarrelled at in an University if they sang with
   understanding both of the matter and manner thereof. Yet some took
   great distaste thereat as attendancie to superstition."[13:1]

The chapel at Peterhouse, we read elsewhere, which was built in 1632,
and consecrated by Bishop White of Ely, had a beautiful ceiling and a
noble east window. "A grave divine," Fuller tells us, "preaching before
the University at St. Mary's, had this smart passage in his Sermon--that
as at the Olympian Games he was counted the Conqueror who could drive
his chariot wheels nearest the mark yet so as not to hinder his running
or to stick thereon, so he who in his Sermons could preach _near Popery_
and yet _no Popery_, _there was your man_. And indeed it now began to be
the general complaint of most moderate men that many in the University,
both in the schools and pulpits, approached the opinions of the Church
of Rome nearer than ever before."

Archbishop Laud, unlike the bishops of Dr. Newman's day, favoured the
Catholic revival, and when Mr. Bernard, the lecturer of St. Sepulchre's,
London, preached a "No Popery" sermon at St. Mary's, Cambridge, he was
dragged into the High Commission Court, and, as the hateful practice
then was, a practice dear to the soul of Laud, was bidden to subscribe a
formal recantation. This Mr. Bernard refused to do, though professing
his sincere sorrow and penitence for any oversights and hasty
expressions in his sermon. Thereupon he was sent back to prison, where
he died. "If," adds Fuller, "he was miserably abused in prison by the
keepers (as some have reported) to the shortening of his life, He that
maketh inquisition for blood either hath or will be a revenger
thereof."[14:1]

By the side of this grim story the much-written-about incidents of the
Oxford Movement seem trivial enough.

Not a few Cambridge scholars of this period, Richard Crashaw among the
number, found permanent refuge in Rome.

The story of Marvell's conversion is emphatic but vague in its details.
The "Jesuits," who were well represented in Cambridge at the time, are
said to have persuaded him to leave Cambridge secretly, and to take
refuge in one of their houses in London. Thither the elder Marvell
followed in pursuit, and after search came across his son in a
bookseller's shop, where he succeeded both in convincing the boy of his
errors and in persuading him to return to Trinity. An odd story, and
not, as it stands, very credible; but Mr. Grosart discovered among the
Marvell papers at Hull a fragment of a letter without signature,
address, or date, which throws some sort of light on the incident. This
letter was evidently, as Mr. Grosart surmises, sent to the elder Marvell
by some similarly afflicted parent. In its fragmentary state the letter
reads as follows:--

   "Worthy S^r,--M^r Breerecliffe being w^th me to-day, I related vnto
   him a fearfull passage lately at Cambridg touching a sonne of mine,
   Bachelor of Arts in Katherine Hall, w^ch was this. He was lately
   inuited to a supper in towne by a gentlewoman, where was one M^r
   Nichols a felow of Peterhouse, and another or two masters of arts, I
   know not directly whether felowes or not: my sonne hauing noe
   p'ferment, but liuing meerely of my penny, they pressed him much to
   come to liue at their house, and for chamber and extraordinary bookes
   they promised farre: and then earnestly moued him to goe to Somerset
   house, where they could doe much for p'ferring him to some eminent
   place, and in conclusion to popish arguments to seduce him soe rotten
   and vnsauory as being ouerheard it was brought in question before the
   heads of the Uniuersity: _Dr. Cosens_, being _Vice Chancelor_ noe
   punishment is inioined him: but on Ash-wednesday next a recantation
   in regent house of some popish tenets Nicols let fall: I p'ceive by
   M^r Breercliffe some such prank vsed towards y^r sonne: I desire to
   know what y^u did therin: thinking I cannot doe god better seruice
   then bring it vppon the stage either in Parliament if it hold: or
   informing some Lords of the Counsail to whom I stand much oblieged if
   a bill in Starchamber be meete To terrify others by making these some
   publique spectacle: for if such fearfull practises may goe vnpunished
   I take care whether I may send a child ... the lord."[15:1]

The reference to Dr. Cosens, or Cosin, being Vice-Chancellor gives a
clue to the date, for Cosin was chosen Vice-Chancellor on the 4th of
November 1639.[15:2]

Though we can know nothing of the elder Marvell's methods of
re-conversion, they were more successful than the elder Gibbon's, who,
as we know, packed the future historian off to Lausanne and a Swiss
pastor's house. What Gibbon became on leaving off his Romanism we can
guess for ourselves, whereas Marvell, once out of the hands of these
very shadowy "Jesuits," remained the staunchest of Christian Protestants
to the end of his days.

This strange incident, and two college exercises or poems, one in
Greek, the other in Latin, both having reference to an addition to the
Royal Family, and appearing in the _Musa Cantabrigiensis_ for 1637, are
all the materials that exist for weaving the story of Marvell, the
Cambridge undergraduate. The Latin verses, which are Horatian in style,
contain one pretty stanza, composed apparently before the sex of the
new-born infant was known at Cambridge.

    "Sive felici Carolum figurâ
    Parvulus princeps imitetur almae
    Sive Mariae decoret puellam
                      Dulcis imago."

After taking his Bachelor's degree in 1639, Marvell, being still a
Scholar of the college, must have gone away, for the Conclusion Book of
Trinity, under date September 24, 1641, records as follows:--

   "It is agreed by y^e Master and 8 seniors y^t M^r Carter and D^r
   Wakefields, D^r Marvell, D^r Waterhouse, and D^r Maye in regard y^t
   some of them are reported to be married and y^t others look not after
   y^eir days nor Acts shall receave no more benefitt of y^e Coll and
   shall be out of y^ier places unless y^ei shew just cause to y^e Coll
   for y^e contrary in 3 months."

Dr. Lort, in his amiable letter of 1765, already mentioned, points out
that this entry contains no reflection on Marvell's morals, but shows
that he was given "notice to quit" for non-residence, "then much more
strictly enjoined than it is now." The days referred to in the entry
were, so the master obligingly explains, "the certain number allowed by
statute to absentees," whilst the "acts mean the Exercises also enjoyned
by the statutes." Dr. Lort adds, "It does not appear, by any subsequent
entry, whether Marvell did or did not comply with this order." We may
now safely assume he did not. Marvell's Cambridge days were over.

The vacations, no inconsiderable part of the year, were probably spent
by Marvell under his father's roof at Hull, where his two elder sisters
were married and settled. It is not to be wondered at that Andrew
Marvell should, for so many years, have represented Hull in the House of
Commons, for both he and his family were well known in the town. The
elder Marvell added to his reputation as a teacher and preacher the
character of a devoted servant of his flock in the hour of danger. The
plague twice visited Hull during the time of the elder Marvell, first in
1635 and again in 1638. In those days men might well pray to be
delivered from "plague, pestilence, and famine." Hull suffered terribly
on both occasions. We have seen, in comparatively recent times, the
effect of the cholera upon large towns, and the plague was worse than
the cholera many times over. The Hull preacher, despite the stigma of
_facetiousness_, which still clings to him, stuck to his post, visiting
the sick, burying the dead, and even, which seems a little superfluous,
preaching and afterwards printing "by request" their funeral sermons. A
brave man, indeed, and one reserved for a tragic end.

In April 1638 the poet's mother died. In the following November the
elder Marvell married a widow lady, but his own end was close upon him.
The earliest consecutive account of this strange event is in Gent's
_History of Hull_ (1735):--"This year, 1640, the Rev. Mr. Andrew
Marvell, Lecturer of Hull, sailing over the Humber in company with
Madame Skinner of Thornton College and a young beautiful couple who were
going to be wedded; a speedy Fate prevented the designed happy union
thro' a violent storm which overset the boat and put a period to all
their lives, nor were there any remains of them or the vessel ever after
found, tho' earnestly sought for on distant shores."

Thus died by drowning a brave man, a good Christian, and an excellent
clergyman of the Reformed Church of England. The plain narrative just
quoted has been embroidered by many long-subsequent writers in the
interests of those who love presentiments and ghostly intimations of
impending events, and in one of these versions it is recorded, that
though the morning was clear, the breeze fair, and the company gay, yet
when stepping into the boat "the reverend man exclaimed, 'Ho for
Heaven,' and threw his staff ashore and left it to Providence to fulfil
its awful warning."

So melancholy an occurrence naturally excited great attention, and long
lingered in local memories. Everybody in Hull knew who was their
member's father.

There is an obstinate tradition quite unverifiable that Mrs. Skinner,
the mother of the beautiful young lady who was drowned with the elder
Marvell, adopted the young Marvell as a son, sending to Cambridge for
him after his father's death, and providing him with the means of
travel, and that afterwards she bequeathed him her estate. Whether there
is any truth in this story cannot now be ascertained. The Skinners were
a well-known Hull family, one of them, a brother of that Cyriac Skinner
who was urged by Milton in immortal verse to enjoy himself whilst the
mood was on him, having been Mayor of Hull. The lady, doubtless, had
money, and Andrew Marvell was in need of money, and appears to have been
supplied with it. It is quite possible the tradition is true.


FOOTNOTES:

[6:1] Fuller's _Worthies_ (1662), p. 159.

[8:1] "The Fuller Worthies Library," 4 vols., 1872. Hereafter referred
to as _Grosart_.

[8:2] _Mr. Smirke or the Divine in Mode._--Grosart, iv. 15.

[11:1] _Autobiography of Matthew Robinson_. Edited by J.E.B. Mayor,
Cambridge, 1856.

[12:1] _Behemoth_, Hobbes' Works (Molesworth), vol. vi., see pp. 168,
218, 233-6.

[12:2] Worthington's _Diary_, vol. i. p. 5 (Chetham Society).

[13:1] Fuller, _History of Cambridge University_ (1655), p. 167.

[14:1] Fuller, p. 166.

[15:1] Grosart, I., xxviii.

[15:2] See Worthington's _Diary_, vol. i. p. 7.




CHAPTER II

"THE HAPPY GARDEN-STATE"


The seventeenth century was the century of travel for educated
Englishmen--of long, leisurely travel. Milton's famous Italian tour
lasted fifteen months. John Evelyn's _Wander-Jahre_ occupied four years.
Andrew Marvell lived abroad in France, Spain, Holland, and Italy from
1642 to 1646, and we have Milton's word for it that when the traveller
returned he was well acquainted with the French, Dutch, Spanish, and
Italian languages. Andrew Marvell was a highly cultivated man, living in
a highly cultivated age, in daily converse with scholars, poets,
philosophers, and men of very considerable scientific attainments. In
reading Clarendon and Burnet, and whilst turning over Aubrey's
delightful gossip, it is impossible not to be struck with the width and
variety of the learning as well as with the wit of the period.
Intellectually it was a great age.

No record remains of Marvell's travels during these years. Up and down
his writings the careful reader will come across pleasant references to
foreign manners and customs, betokening the keen humorous observer, and
the possession of that wide-eyed faculty that takes a pleasure, half
contemplative, half the result of animal spirits, in watching the way of
the world wherever you may chance to be. Of another and an earlier
traveller, Sir Henry Wotton, we read in "Walton's _Life_."

   "And whereas he was noted in his youth to have a sharp wit and apt to
   jest, _that_ by time, travel, and conversation was so polished and
   made useful, that his company seemed to be one of the delights of
   mankind."

In all Marvell's work, as poet, as Parliamentarian, as controversialist,
we shall see the travelled man. Certainly no one ever more fully grasped
the sense of the famous sentence given by Wotton to Milton, when the
latter was starting on his travels: "_I pensieri stretti ed il viso
sciolto._"

Marvell was in Rome about 1645. I can give no other date during the
whole four years. This, our only date, rests upon an assumption. In
Marvell's earliest satirical poem he gives an account of a visit he paid
in Rome to the unlucky poetaster Flecknoe, who was not in Rome until
1645. If, therefore, the poem records an actual visit, it follows that
the author of the poem was in Rome at the same time. It is not very
near, but it is as near as we can get.

Richard Flecknoe was an Irish priest of blameless life, with a passion
for scribbling and for printing. His exquisite reason for both these
superfluous acts is worth quoting:--

   "I write chiefly to avoid idleness, and print to avoid the imputation
   (of idleness), and as others do it to live after they are dead, I do
   it only not to be thought dead whilst I am alive."[20:1]

Such frankness should have disarmed ridicule, but somehow or another
this amiable man came to be regarded as the type of a dull author, and
his name passed into a proverb for stupidity, so much so that when
Dryden in 1682 was casting about how best to give pain to Shadwell, he
devised the plan of his famous satire, "MacFlecknoe," where in biting
verse he describes Flecknoe (who was happily dead) as an aged Prince--

                       "Who like Augustus young
    Was called to empire and had governed long;
    In prose and verse was owned, without dispute,
    Through all the realms of nonsense absolute."

Dryden goes on to picture the aged Flecknoe,

      "pondering which of all his sons was fit
    To reign and wage immortal war with Wit,"

and fixing on Shadwell.

    "Shadwell alone my perfect image bears,
    Mature in dulness from his tender years;
    Shadwell alone, of all my sons, is he
    Who stands confirmed in full stupidity:
    The rest to some faint meaning make pretence,
    But Shadwell never deviates into sense."

Thus has it come about that Flecknoe, the Irish priest, whom Marvell
visited in his Roman garret in 1645, bears a name ever memorable in
literature.

Marvell's own poem, though eclipsed by the splendour of Glorious John's
resounding lines, has an interest of its own as being, in its roughly
humorous way, a forerunner of the "Dunciad" and "Grub Street"
literature, by which in sundry moods 'tis "pleasure to be bound." It
describes seeking out the poetaster in his lodging "three staircases
high," at the sign of the Pelican, in a room so small that it seemed "a
coffin set in the stair's head." No sooner was the rhymer unearthed than
straightway he began to recite his poetry in dismal tones, much to his
visitor's dismay:--

    "But I who now imagin'd myself brought
    To my last trial, in a serious thought
    Calm'd the disorders of my youthful breast
    And to my martyrdom preparèd rest.
    Only this frail ambition did remain,
    The last distemper of the sober brain,
    That there had been some present to assure
    The future ages how I did endure."

To stop the cataract of "hideous verse," Marvell invited the scarecrow
to dinner, and waits while he dresses. As they turn to leave, for the
room is so small that the man who comes in last must be the first to go
out, they meet a friend of the poet on the stairs, who makes a third at
dinner. After dinner Flecknoe produces ten quires of paper, from which
the friend proceeds to read, but so infamously as to excite their
author's rage:--

    "But all his praises could not now appease
    The provok't Author, whom it did displease
    To hear his verses by so just a curse
    That were ill made, condemned to be read worse:
    And how (impossible!) he made yet more
    Absurdities in them than were before:
    For his untun'd voice did fall or raise
    As a deaf man upon the Viol plays,
    Making the half-points and the periods run
    Confus'der than the atoms in the sun:
    Thereat the poet swell'd with anger full,"

and after violent exclamations retires in dudgeon back to his room. The
faithful friend is in despair. What is he to do to make peace? "Who
would commend his mistress now?" Marvell

                "counselled him to go in time
    Ere the fierce poet's anger turned to rhyme."

The advice was taken, and Marvell, finding himself at last free from
boredom, went off to St. Peter's to return thanks.

This poem is but an unsatisfactory _souvenir de voyage_, but it is all
there is.

What Marvell was doing during the stirring years 1646-1650 is not
known. Even in the most troubled times men go about their business, and
our poet was always a man of affairs. As for his opinions during these
years, we can only guess at them from those to which he afterwards gave
expression. Marvell was neither a Republican nor a Puritan. Like his
father before him, he was a Protestant and a member of the Reformed
Church of England. He stood for both King and Parliament. Archbishop
Laud he distrusted, and it may well be detested, but good churchmen have
often distrusted and even detested their archbishops. Mr. Gladstone had
no great regard for Archbishop Tait. Before the Act of Uniformity and
the repressive legislation that followed upon its heels had driven
English dissent into its final moulds, it was not doctrine but
ceremonies that disturbed men's minds; and Marvell belonged to that
school of English churchmen, by no means the least distinguished school,
which was not disposed to quarrel with their fellow-Christians over
white surplices, the ring in matrimony, or the attitude during Holy
Communion. He shared the belief of a contemporary that no system is bad
enough to destroy a good man, or good enough to save a bad one.

The Civil War was to Marvell what it was to most wise men not devoured
by faction--a deplorable event. Twenty years after he wrote in the
_Rehearsal Transprosed_:--

   "Whether it be a war of religion or of liberty it is not worth the
   labour to inquire. Whichsoever was at the top, the other was at the
   bottom; but upon considering all, I think the cause was too good to
   have been fought for. Men ought to have trusted God--they ought to
   have trusted the King with that whole matter. The arms of the Church
   are prayers and tears, the arms of the subject are patience and
   petitions. The King himself being of so accurate and piercing a
   judgment would soon have felt it where it stuck. For men may spare
   their pains when Nature is at work, and the world will not go the
   faster for our driving. Even as his present Majesty's happy
   Restoration did itself, so all things else happen in their best and
   proper time, without any heed of our officiousness."[24:1]

In the face of this passage and many another of the like spirit, it is
puzzling to find such a man, for example, as Thomas Baker, the ejected
non-juring Fellow and historian of St. John's College, Cambridge
(1656-1740), writing of Marvell as "that bitter republican"; and Dryden,
who probably knew Marvell, comparing his controversial pamphlets with
those of Martin Marprelate, or at all events speaking of Martin
Marprelate as "the Marvell of those times."[24:2] A somewhat
anti-prelatical note runs through Marvell's writings, but it is a
familiar enough note in the works of the English laity, and by no means
dissevers its possessor from the Anglican Church. But there are some
heated expressions in the satires which probably gave rise to the belief
that Marvell was a Republican.[24:3]

During the Commonwealth Marvell was content to be a civil servant. He
entertained for the Lord-Protector the same kind of admiration that such
a loyalist as Chateaubriand could not help feeling for Napoleon. Even
Clarendon's pedantic soul occasionally vibrates as he writes of Oliver,
and compares his reputation in foreign courts with that of his own
royal master. When the Restoration came Marvell rejoiced. Two
old-established things had been destroyed by Cromwell--Kings and
Parliaments, and Marvell was glad to see them both back again in
England.

Some verses of Marvell's attributable to this period (1646-1650) show
him keeping what may be called Royalist company. With a dozen other
friends of Richard Lovelace, the Cavalier poet and the author of two of
the most famous stanzas in English verse, Marvell contributed some
commendatory lines addressed to his "noble friend, Mr. Richard Lovelace,
upon his Poems," which appeared with the poems themselves in that year
of fate, 1649. "After the murder of the King," says Anthony Wood,
"Lovelace was set at liberty, and having by that time consumed all his
estate, grew very melancholy, became very poor in body and purse, was
the object of charity, went in ragged clothes (whereas when he was in
glory he wore cloth of gold and silver), and mostly lodged in obscure
and dirty places, more befitting the worst of beggars and poorest of
servants."

Then it was that _Lucasta_ made its first appearance. When the fortunes
of the gallant poet were at their lowest and never to revive, Marvell
seizes the occasion to deplore the degeneracy of the times, a familiar
theme with poets:--

    "Our civil wars have lost the civic crown,
    He highest builds who with most art destroys,
    And against others' fame his own employs."

He then glances scornfully at the new Presbyterian censorship of the
press:--

    "The barbèd censurers begin to look
    Like the grim consistory on thy book,
    And on each line cast a reforming eye,"

and suggests that _Lucasta_ is in danger because in 1642 its author had
been imprisoned by order of the House of Commons for presenting a
petition from Kent which prayed for the restoration of the Book of
Common Prayer. This danger is, however, overcome by the ladies, who rise
in arms to defend their favourite poet.

    "But when the beauteous Ladies came to know
    That their dear Lovelace was endangered so,
    Lovelace that thaw'd the most congealèd breast,
    He who lov'd best and them defended best,
    They all in mutiny, though yet undrest,
    Sally'd."

One of them challenged Marvell as to whether he had not been of the
poet's traducers, but he answered No!

    "O No, mistake not, I reply'd, for I
    In your defence or in his cause would die.
    But he, secure of glory and of time,
    Above their envy or my aid doth climb.
    Him, bravest men and fairest nymphs approve,
    His book in them finds Judgment, with you, Love."

Lovelace did not live to see the Restoration, but died in a mean lodging
near Shoe Lane in April 1658, and was buried in St. Bridget's Church.
Let us indulge the hope that the friends who occupied so many of the
introductory pages of Lovelace's _Lucasta_ occasionally enlivened the
solitude and relieved the distress of the poet whose praises they had
once sung with so much vigour. As Marvell was undoubtedly a friendly
man, and one who loved to be alone with his friends, and had never any
house of his own to keep up, living for the most part in hired lodgings,
it would be unkind to doubt that he at least did not forget Lovelace in
his poverty and depression of spirit.

In 1649 thirty-three poets combined to weep over the early grave of the
Lord Henry Hastings, the eldest son of the sixth Earl of Huntingdon, who
died of the smallpox in the twentieth year of his age. Not even this
plentiful discharge of poets' tears should rob the young nobleman of his
claim to be regarded as a fine example of the great learning,
accomplishments, and high spirits of the age. We can still produce the
thirty-three poets, but what young nobleman is there who can boast such
erudition as had rewarded the scorned delights and the laborious days of
this Lord Hastings? We have at least the satisfaction of knowing that
did such a one exist he probably would not die of the smallpox. Among
the poets who wept on this occasion were Herrick, Sir John Denham,
Andrew Marvell, and John Dryden, then a Westminster schoolboy, whose
description of the smallpox is as bad as the disease.

Marvell's verses begin very prettily and soon introduce a characteristic
touch:--

    "Go, stand betwixt the Morning and the Flowers,
    And ere they fall arrest the early showers,
    Hastings is dead; and we disconsolate
    With early tears must mourn his early fate."

In 1650 Marvell, then in his twenty-ninth year, went to live with Lord
Fairfax at Nunappleton House in Yorkshire, as tutor to the only child
and daughter of the house, Mary Fairfax, aged twelve years (born 30th
July 1638). This proved to be a great event in Marvell's life as a poet,
and it happened at an epoch in the distinguished career of the famous
Parliamentarian general

    "Whose name in arms through Europe rings."

Lord Fairfax, though he had countenanced, if not approved, the trial
and deposition of the king, had resolutely held himself aloof from the
proceedings which, beginning on Saturday the 20th of January 1649,
terminated so dismally on Tuesday the 30th. The strange part played by
Lady Fairfax on the first day of the so-called trial (though it was no
greater a travesty of justice than many a real trial both before and
after) is one of the best-known stories in English history. There are
several versions of it. Having provided herself with a seat in a small
gallery in Westminster Hall, just above the heads of the judges, when
her husband's name was called out as one of the commissioners, the
intrepid lady (no Cavalier's dame, be it remembered, but a true blue
Presbyterian), a brave soldier's daughter, cried out, "Lord Fairfax is
not here; he will never sit among you. You do wrong to name him as a
sitting Commissioner." This is Rushworth's version, and he was present.
Clarendon, who was not present, being abroad at the time, reports the
words as, "He has more wit than to be here."

Later on in the day, when the President Bradshaw interrupted the king
and peremptorily bade him to answer the charges exhibited against him
"in the name of the Commons of England assembled, and of the people of
England," Lady Fairfax again rose to her feet and exclaimed, "It's a
lie! Not half the people. Where are they and their consents? Oliver
Cromwell is a traitor."

Lieutenant-Colonel Axtell, who during the trial was in command of a
regiment in Westminster and charged by his military superior, Lord
Fairfax himself, with the duty of maintaining order, hearing this
disturbance, went forward and told Lady Fairfax to hold her tongue,
sound advice which she appears to have taken. After the Restoration
Axtell was put to his trial as a "regicide." His defence, which was,
that as a soldier he obeyed his orders, and was no more guilty than his
general, Lord Fairfax, was not listened to, and he was sentenced to
death, a fate which he met like the brave man he was.

Although Fairfax did not immediately resign his command after the king's
death, from that moment he lost heart in the cause. Lady Fairfax, whose
loyalty to Charles may have been quickened by her dislike of Oliver, had
great influence with him, and it may well be that his conscience pricked
him. The rupture came in June 1650, when Charles's son made his
appearance in Scotland and his peace with the Presbyterians, subscribing
with inward emotions it would be unkind to attempt to describe the
Solemn League and Covenant, and attending services and listening to
sermons the length of which, at least, he never forgot. War was plainly
imminent between the two countries. The question was, who should begin?
Cromwell, who had hurried home from Ireland, Lambert, and Harrison were
all keen to strike the first blow. Fairfax felt a scruple, and in those
days scruples counted. Was there, he asked, a just cause for an invasion
of Scotland? A committee was appointed, consisting of the three warriors
above-named with St. John and Whitelock, to confer with the Lord-General
and satisfy him of the lawfulness of the undertaking. The six met, and
having first prayed--Oliver praying first--they proceeded to a
discussion which may be read at length in Whitelock's _Memorials_, vol.
iii. p. 207. The substance of their talk was as follows: Fairfax's
scruple proved to be that both they and the Scots had joined in the
Solemn League and Covenant, and that, therefore, until Scotland assumed
the offensive, there was no cause for an invasion. Cromwell's retort,
after a preliminary quibble, was practical enough. "War is inevitable.
Is it better to have it in the bowels of another's country or in one's
own? In one or other it must be." Fairfax's scruple, however, withstood
this battery, though it was strongly enforced by Harrison, who, in reply
to the Lord-General's question, "What was the warrant for the assumption
that Scotland meant to fall upon England?" inquired, if Scotland did not
mean to invade England, for whose benefit were levies being made and
soldiers enlisted.

Fairfax proved immovable. "Every man," said he, "must stand or fall by
his own conscience"; and as he offered to lay down his command, there
was nothing for it but to accept the resignation and appoint his
successor. This was speedily done, and on the 28th of June 1650 "Oliver
Cromwell, Esquire," was appointed Captain-General and Commander-in-chief
of all the forces. On 16th July Cromwell crossed the Tweed, and on the
3rd of September the Lord delivered Leslie into his hands at Dunbar.

It was in these circumstances that Lord Fairfax and his energetic lady
and only child went back to their Yorkshire home in the midsummer of
1650, taking Marvell with them to instruct the Lady Mary in the tongues.

Nunappleton House is in the Ainstey of York, a pleasant bit of country
bounded by the rivers Ouse, Wharfe, and Nidd. The modern traveller, as
his train rushes north, whilst shut up in his corridor-carriage with his
rug, his pipe, and his novel, passes at no great distance from the house
on the way between Selby and York. The old house, as it was in Marvell's
time, is thus described by Captain Markham, who had a print to help
him, in his delightful _Life of the Great Lord Fairfax_:--

   "It was a picturesque brick mansion with stone copings and a high
   steep roof, and consisted of a centre and two wings at right angles,
   forming three sides of a square, facing to the north. The great hall
   or gallery occupied the centre between the two wings. It was fifty
   yards long, and was adorned with thirty shields in wood, painted with
   the arms of the family. In the three rooms there were chimney-pieces
   of delicate marble of various colours, and many fine portraits on the
   walls. The central part of the house was surrounded by a cupola, and
   clustering chimneys rose in the two wings. A noble park with splendid
   oak-trees, and containing 300 head of deer, stretched away to the
   north, while on the south side were the ruins of the old Nunnery, the
   flower-garden, and the low meadows called _ings_ extending to the
   banks of the Wharfe. In this flower-garden the General took especial
   delight. The flowers were planted in masses, tulips, pinks, and
   roses, each in separate beds, which were cut into the shape of forts
   with five bastions. General Lambert, whom Fairfax had reared as a
   soldier, also loved his flowers, and excelled both in cultivating
   them and in painting them from Nature. Lord Fairfax only went to
   Denton, the favourite seat of his grandfather, when the floods were
   out over the _ings_ at Nunappleton, and he also occasionally resorted
   to his house at Bishop Hill in York."[31:1]

In this garden the muse of Andrew Marvell blossomed like the
cherry-tree.

Lord Fairfax, though furious in war, and badly wounded in many a fierce
engagement, was, when otherwise occupied, a man of quiet literary
tastes, and a good bit of a collector and _virtuoso_. Some of the rare
books and manuscripts he had around him at Nunappleton are now in the
Bodleian, the treasures of which he had protected in troubled times. He
loved to handle medals and coins, and knew the points of old
engravings. He wrote a history of the Christian Church down to our own
ill-conducted Reformation, and composed a complete metrical version of
the Psalms of David and of the Song of Solomon. These and many other
productions, which he characterised as "The Employment of my Solitude,"
still remain in his own handwriting. Amongst them, Yorkshire men will
hear with pleasure, is a "Treatise on the breeding of the Horse."

Of the quality of his wife we have already had a touch. She was one of
the four daughters of Lord Vere of Tilbury, who came of a fine fighting
family, and whose daughters had a roughish bringing-up, chiefly in the
Netherlands. None of the daughters were reckoned beautiful, either in
face or figure, and it may well be that Lady Fairfax had something about
her of the old campaigner; but of her courage, sincerity, and goodness
there can be no question. Her loyalty was no sickly fruit of "Church
Principles," for her strong intelligence rejected scornfully the slavish
doctrines, alien to our political constitution, of divine right and
passive obedience; but a loyalty, none the less, it was, of a very
valuable kind. She was fond of argument, and with Lady Fairfax at
Nunappleton there was never likely to be any dearth of sensible talk and
lively reminiscence. The tragedy of the 30th of January could never be
forgotten, and it is possible that Marvell's most famous verses, so
nobly descriptive of the demeanour of the king on that memorable
occasion, derived their inspiration from discourse at Nunappleton.

Of the Lady Mary, aged twelve, we have no direct testimony. When she
grew up and had her portrait painted she stands revealed as a stout
young woman with a plain good-natured face. The poor soul needed all
the good-nature heaven had bestowed upon her, for she had to bear the
misery and disgrace which were the inevitable marriage-portion of the
woman whose ill-luck it was to become the wife of George Villiers,
second Duke of Buckingham. Somebody seems to have taught her philosophy,
for she bore her misfortunes as best became a great lady, living as one
who had sorrow but no grievance. The duke died in 1688; she lived on
till 1704. She was ever a good friend to another ill-used solitary wife,
Catherine of Braganza. Marvell had every reason to be proud of his
pupil.

Beside the actual inmates of the great house, the whole countryside
swarmed with Fairfaxes. At the Rectory of Bolton Percy was the late
Lord-General's uncle, Henry Fairfax, and his two sons, Henry, who
succeeded to the title, and the better-known Brian, the biographer of
the Duke of Buckingham. At Stenton, four miles off, lived the widow of
the gallant Sir William Fairfax, who died, covered with wounds, in 1644
before Montgomery Castle. There were two sons and two daughters at
Stenton, whilst Charles Fairfax, another uncle, and the lawyer and
genealogist of the family, lived at no great distance with no less than
fourteen children. There were also sisters of Lord Fairfax, with
families of their own, all settled in the same part of the county.

Such were the agreeable surroundings of our poet for two years,
1650-1652. I must leave it to the imaginations of my readers to fill up
the picture, for excepting the poems, which we may safely assume were
written at Nunappleton House, and--who can doubt it?--read aloud to its
inmates, there is nothing more to be said.

Before considering the Nunappleton poetry, a word must be got in of
bibliography. College exercises and complimentary verses excepted,
Marvell printed none of his verse under his own name in his lifetime. So
far as his themes were political there is no need to wonder at this.
Indeed, the wonder is how, despite their anonymity, their author kept
his ears; but why the Nunappleton verse should have remained in
manuscript for more than thirty years is hard to explain.

Until Pope took his muse to market, poetry, apart from the drama, had no
direct commercial value, or one too small to be ranked as a motive for
publication. None the less, the age loved distinction and appreciated
wit, and to be known as a poet whose verses "numbered good intellects"
was to gain the _entrée_ to the society of men both of intellect and
fashion, and also, not infrequently, snug berths in the public service,
and secretaryships to foreign missions and embassies. Thus there was
always, in addition to natural vanity, a strong motive for a
seventeenth-century poet to publish his poems. To-day one would hesitate
to recommend a young man who wanted to get on in the world to publish a
volume of verse; but the age of "wit" and "parts" is over.

It was not till 1681--three years after Marvell's death--that the small
folio appeared with a fine portrait, still dear to the collector, which
contains for the first time what may be called the "garden-poetry" of
our author, together with some specimens of his political and satirical
versification.

Marvell's most famous poem--_The Ode upon Cromwell's Return from
Ireland_--is not included in the 1681 volume, and remained in manuscript
until 1776, as also did the poem upon Cromwell's death.

The remainder of the political poems, which had made their first
appearance as broadsheets, were reprinted after the Revolution in the
well-known _Collection of Poems on Affairs of State_.[35:1] These verses
were never owned by Marvell, and it is probable that some of them,
though attributed to him, are not his at all. We have only tradition to
go by. In the case of political satires, squibs, epigrams, rough popular
occasional rhymes flung off both in haste and heat to be sold with old
ballads in the market-place, we need not seek for better evidence than
tradition, which indeed is often the only external evidence we have for
the authorship of much more important things.

Now to return to the Nunappleton poetry.

In a poem of 776 lines Marvell tells the story and describes the charms
of the house which Lord Fairfax built for himself during the war, and to
which, as just narrated, he retired in the summer of 1650. The story is
only too familiar a one, being writ large over many a fine property.
Appleton House was Church loot. In the time of Henry, "the majestic lord
that burst the bonds of Rome," the old house at Nunappleton was a
Cistercian nunnery, a religious house. In 1542 the community was
suppressed and its property appropriated by the great-grandfather of the
Lord-General--one Sir Thomas Fairfax. The religious buildings were
pulled down and a new secular house rose in their place. In these bare
and sordid facts there is not much room for poetry, but there is a story
thrown in. Shortly before 1518 a Yorkshire heiress, bearing the
unromantic name of Isabella Thwaites, was living in the Cistercian
abbey, under the guardianship of the abbess, the Lady Anna Langton.
Property under the care of the Church is always supposed to be in
danger, and the Lady Anna was freely credited with the desire to make a
nun of her ward, and so keep her broad acres in Wharfedale and her
messuages in York for the use of Mother Church. None the less, the young
lady was allowed to go about and visit her neighbours, and whilst so
doing she fell in love with Sir William Fairfax, or he fell in love with
her or with her estates. Thereupon, so the story proceeds, the abbess
kept her ward a close prisoner within the nunnery walls. Legal
proceedings were taken, but in the end the privacy of the nunnery was
invaded, and Miss Thwaites was abducted and married to Sir William
Fairfax at the church of Bolton Percy. The lady abbess had to submit to
_vis major_, but worse days were in front of her, for she lived on to
see the nunnery itself despoiled, and the fair domains she had during a
long life preserved and maintained for religious uses handed over to the
son of her former ward, Isabella Thwaites.

"Paper Queen" Zhang Yin, 53, is the founder and chairwoman of Nine Dragons Paper, China's largest containerboard producer. Zhang ranks as the wealthiest woman in the world, with an estimated personal fortune of 38 billion yuan ($5.6 billion).


European scholars observed in the 19th century that Hindu women are "naturally chaste" and "more virtuous" than other women.[27] During the British Raj, many reformers such as Ram Mohan Roy, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, Jyotirao Phule, etc., fought for the betterment of women. Peary Charan Sarkar, a former student of Hindu College, Calcutta and a member of "Young Bengal", set up the first free school for girls in India in 1847 in Barasat, a suburb of Calcutta (later the school was named Kalikrishna Girls' High School).
While this might suggest that there was no positive British contribution during the Raj era, that is not entirely the case. Missionaries' wives such as Martha Mault née Mead and her daughter Eliza Caldwell née Mault are rightly remembered for pioneering the education and training of girls in south India. This practise initially met with local resistance, as it flew in the face of tradition. Raja Rammohan Roy's efforts led to the abolition of Sati under Governor-General William Cavendish-Bentinck in 1829. Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's crusade for improvement in the situation of widows led to the Widow Remarriage Act of 1856. Many women reformers such as Pandita Ramabai also helped the cause of women.
Kittur Chennamma, queen of the princely state Kittur in Karnataka[citation needed], led an armed rebellion against the British in response to the Doctrine of lapse. Abbakka Rani, queen of coastal Karnataka, led the defence against invading European armies, notably the Portuguese in the 16th century. Rani Lakshmi Bai, the Queen of Jhansi, led the Indian Rebellion of 1857 against the British. She is now widely considered as a national hero. Begum Hazrat Mahal, the co-ruler of Awadh, was another ruler who led the revolt of 1857. She refused deals with the British and later retreated to Nepal. The Begums of Bhopal were also considered notable female rulers during this period. They did not observe purdah and were trained in martial arts.
Chandramukhi Basu, Kadambini Ganguly and Anandi Gopal Joshi were some of the earliest Indian women to obtain a degree.
In 1917, the first women's delegation met the Secretary of State to demand women's political rights, supported by the Indian National Congress. The All India Women's Education Conference was held in Pune in 1927[citation needed]. In 1929, through the efforts of Mahomed Ali Jinnah, the Child Marriage Restraint Act was passed, stipulating fourteen as the minimum age of marriage for a girl.[22][28] Though Mahatma Gandhi himself married at the age of thirteen, he later urged people to boycott child marriages and called upon young men to marry child widows.[29]
Women played an important part in India's independence struggle. Some famous freedom fighters include Bhikaji Cama, Dr. Annie Besant, Pritilata Waddedar, Vijayalakshmi Pandit, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Aruna Asaf Ali, Sucheta Kriplani and Kasturba Gandhi. Other notable names include Muthulakshmi Reddy and Durgabai Deshmukh. The Rani of Jhansi Regiment of Subhas Chandra Bose's Indian National Army consisted entirely of women, including Captain Lakshmi Sahgal. Sarojini Naidu, a poet and freedom fighter, was the first Indian woman to become President of the Indian National Congress and the first woman to become the governor of a state in India.

Our poet begins by referring to the modest dimensions of the house, and
the natural charms of its surroundings:--

    "The house was built upon the place,
    Only as for a mark of grace,
    And for an inn to entertain
    Its Lord awhile, but not remain.
    Him Bishop's-hill or Denton may,
    Or Billborow, better hold than they:
    But Nature here hath been so free,
    As if she said, 'Leave this to me.'
    Art would more neatly have defac'd
    What she had laid so sweetly waste
    In fragrant gardens, shady woods,
    Deep meadows, and transparent floods."

And then starts the story:--

    "While, with slow eyes, we these survey,
    And on each pleasant footstep stay,
    We opportunely may relate
    The progress of this house's fate.
    A nunnery first gave it birth,
    (For virgin buildings oft brought forth)
    And all that neighbour-ruin shows
    The quarries whence this dwelling rose.
    Near to this gloomy cloister's gates,
    There dwelt the blooming virgin Thwaites,
    Fair beyond measure, and an heir,
    Which might deformity make fair;
    And oft she spent the summer's suns
    Discoursing with the subtle Nuns,
    Whence, in these words, one to her weav'd,
    As 'twere by chance, thoughts long conceiv'd:
    'Within this holy leisure, we
    Live innocently, as you see.
    These walls restrain the world without,
    But hedge our liberty about;
    These bars inclose that wilder den
    Of those wild creatures, callèd men,
    The cloister outward shuts its gates,
    And, from us, locks on them the grates.
    Here we, in shining armour white,
    Like virgin amazons do fight,
    And our chaste lamps we hourly trim,
    Lest the great Bridegroom find them dim.
    Our orient breaths perfumèd are
    With incense of incessant prayer;
    And holy-water of our tears
    Most strangely our complexion clears;
    Not tears of grief, but such as those
    With which calm pleasure overflows;
    Or pity, when we look on you
    That live without this happy vow.
    How should we grieve that must be seen
    Each one a spouse, and each a queen,
    And can in heaven hence behold
    Our brighter robes and crowns of gold!
    When we have prayèd all our beads,
    Some one the holy Legend reads,
    While all the rest with needles paint
    The face and graces of the Saint;
    Some of your features, as we sewed,
    Through every shrine should be bestowed,
    And in one beauty we would take
    Enough a thousand Saints to make.
    And (for I dare not quench the fire
    That me does for your good inspire)
    'Twere sacrilege a man to admit
    To holy things for heaven fit.
    I see the angels in a crown
    On you the lilies showering down;
    And round about you glory breaks,
    That something more than human speaks.
    All beauty when at such a height,
    Is so already consecrate.
    Fairfax I know, and long ere this
    Have marked the youth, and what he is;
    But can he such a rival seem,
    For whom you heaven should disesteem?
    Ah, no! and 'twould more honour prove
    He your devoto were than Love.
    Here live belovèd and obeyed,
    Each one your sister, each your maid,
    And, if our rule seem strictly penned,
    The rule itself to you shall bend.
    Our Abbess, too, now far in age,
    Doth your succession near presage.
    How soft the yoke on us would lie,
    Might such fair hands as yours it tie!
    Your voice, the sweetest of the choir,
    Shall draw heaven nearer, raise us higher,
    And your example, if our head,
    Will soon us to perfection lead.
    Those virtues to us all so dear,
    Will straight grow sanctity when here;
    And that, once sprung, increase so fast,
    Till miracles it work at last.'"

What reply was given by the heiress to these arguments, and others of a
still more seductive hue, the poet does not tell, but turns to the eager
lover who asks, What should he do? He hints that a nunnery is no place
for a virtuous maid, and that the nuns (unlike himself, I hope) are only
thinking of her property. He complains that though the Court has
authorised him to use either peace or force, the nuns still stand upon
their guard.

    "Ill-counselled women, do you know
    Whom you resist or what you do?"

Using a most remarkable poetic licence, the poet refers to the fact that
this barred-out lover is to be the progenitor of the great Lord Fairfax.

    "Is not this he, whose offspring fierce
    Shall fight through all the universe;
    And with successive valour try
    France, Poland, either Germany,
    Till one, as long since prophesied,
    His horse through conquered Britain ride?"

The lover determines to take the place by assault. It was not a very
heroic enterprise, as Marvell describes it.

    "Some to the breach, against their foes,
    Their wooden Saints in vain oppose;
    Another bolder, stands at push,
    With their old holy-water brush,
    While the disjointed Abbess threads
    The jingling chain-shot of her beads;
    But their loud'st cannon were their lungs,
    And sharpest weapons were their tongues.
    But waving these aside like flies,
    Young Fairfax through the wall does rise.
    Then the unfrequented vault appeared,
    And superstition, vainly feared;
    The relicks false were set to view;
    Only the jewels there were true,
    And truly bright and holy Thwaites,
    That weeping at the altar waits.
    But the glad youth away her bears,
    And to the Nuns bequeathes her tears,
    Who guiltily their prize bemoan,
    Like gypsies who a child have stol'n."

The poet then goes on to glorify the results of this union and to
describe happy days spent at Nunappleton by the descendants of Isabella
Thwaites.

    "At the demolishing, this seat
    To Fairfax fell, as by escheat;
    And what both nuns and founders willed,
    'Tis likely better thus fulfilled.
    For if the virgin proved not theirs,
    The cloister yet remainèd hers;
    Though many a nun there made her vow,
    'Twas no religious house till now.
    From that blest bed the hero came
    Whom France and Poland yet does fame;
    Who, when retirèd here to peace,
    His warlike studies could not cease;
    But laid these gardens out, in sport,
    In the just figure of a fort,
    And with five bastions it did fence,
    As aiming one for every sense.
    When in the east the morning ray
    Hangs out the colours of the day,
    The bee through these known alleys hums,
    Beating the dian with its drums.
    Then flowers their drowsy eyelids raise,
    Their silken ensigns each displays,
    And dries its pan, yet dank with dew,
    And fills its flask with odours new.
    These as their Governor goes by
    In fragrant volleys they let fly,
    And to salute their Governess
    Again as great a charge they press:
    None for the virgin nymph; for she
    Seems with the flowers a flower to be.
    And think so still! though not compare
    With breath so sweet, or cheek so fair!
    Well shot, ye firemen! Oh, how sweet
    And round your equal fires do meet,
    Whose shrill report no ear can tell,
    But echoes to the eye and smell!
    See how the flowers, as at parade,
    Under their colours stand displayed;
    Each regiment in order grows,
    That of the tulip, pink and rose.
    But when the vigilant patrol
    Of stars walk round about the pole,
    Their leaves, which to the stalks are curled,
    Seem to their staves the ensigns furled.
    Then in some flower's belovèd hut,
    Each bee, as sentinel, is shut,
    And sleeps so too, but, if once stirred,
    She runs you through, nor asks the word.

    Oh, thou, that dear and happy isle,
    The garden of the world erewhile,
    Thou Paradise of the four seas,
    Which heaven planted us to please,
    But, to exclude the world, did guard
    With watery, if not flaming sword,--
    What luckless apple did we taste,
    To make us mortal, and thee waste?
    Unhappy! shall we never more
    That sweet militia restore,
    When gardens only had their towers
    And all the garrisons were flowers,
    When roses only arms might bear,
    And men did rosy garlands wear?
    Tulips, in several colours barred,
    Were then the Switzers of our guard;
    The gardener had the soldier's place,
    And his more gentle forts did trace;
    The nursery of all things green
    Was then the only magazine;
    The winter quarters were the stoves,
    Where he the tender plants removes.
    But war all this doth overgrow:
    We ordnance plant, and powder sow.

    The arching boughs unite between
    The columns of the temple green,
    And underneath the wingèd quires
    Echo about their tunèd fires.
    The nightingale does here make choice
    To sing the trials of her voice;
    Low shrubs she sits in, and adorns
    With music high the squatted thorns;
    But highest oaks stoop down to hear,
    And listening elders prick the ear;
    The thorn, lest it should hurt her, draws
    Within the skin its shrunken claws.
    But I have for my music found
    A sadder, yet more pleasing sound;
    The stock-doves, whose fair necks are graced
    With nuptial rings, their ensigns chaste,
    Yet always, for some cause unknown,
    Sad pair, unto the elms they moan.
    O why should such a couple mourn,
    That in so equal flames do burn!
    Then as I careless on the bed
    Of gelid strawberries do tread,
    And through the hazels thick espy
    The hatching throstle's shining eye,
    The heron, from the ash's top,
    The eldest of its young lets drop,
    As if it stork-like did pretend
    That tribute to its lord to send.

    Thus I, easy philosopher,
    Among the birds and trees confer;
    And little now to make me, wants,
    Or of the fowls, or of the plants;
    Give me but wings as they, and I
    Straight floating on the air shall fly;
    Or turn me but, and you shall see
    I was but an inverted tree.
    Already I begin to call
    In their most learn'd original,
    And where I language want, my signs
    The bird upon the bough divines,
    And more attentive there doth sit
    Than if she were with lime-twigs knit,
    No leaf does tremble in the wind,
    Which I returning cannot find.
    One of these scattered Sibyls' leaves
    Strange prophecies my fancy weaves,
    And in one history consumes,
    Like Mexique paintings, all the plumes;
    What Rome, Greece, Palestine e'er said,
    I in this light mosaic read.
    Thrice happy he, who, not mistook,
    Hath read in Nature's mystic book!
    And see how chance's better wit
    Could with a mask my studies hit!
    The oak-leaves me embroider all,
    Between which caterpillars crawl;
    And ivy, with familiar trails,
    Me licks and clasps, and curls and hales.
    Under this Attic cope I move,
    Like some great prelate of the grove;
    Then, languishing with ease, I toss
    On pallets swoln of velvet moss,
    While the wind, cooling through the boughs,
    Flatters with air my panting brows.
    Thanks for your rest, ye mossy banks,
    And unto you, cool zephyrs, thanks,
    Who, as my hair, my thoughts too shed,
    And winnow from the chaff my head!

    How safe, methinks, and strong behind
    These trees, have I encamped my mind,
    Where beauty, aiming at the heart,
    Bends in some tree its useless dart,
    And where the world no certain shot
    Can make, or me it toucheth not,
    But I on it securely play
    And gall its horsemen all the day.
    Bind me, ye woodbines, in your twines
    Curl me about, ye gadding vines,
    And oh so close your circles lace,
    That I may never leave this place!
    But, lest your fetters prove too weak,
    Ere I your silken bondage break,
    Do you, O brambles, chain me too,
    And, courteous briars, nail me through!

    Oh what a pleasure 'tis to hedge
    My temples here with heavy sedge,
    Abandoning my lazy side,
    Stretched as a bank unto the tide,
    Or to suspend my sliding foot
    On the osier's underminèd root,
    And in its branches tough to hang,
    While at my lines the fishes twang?
    But now away, my hooks, my quills,
    And angles, idle utensils!
    The young MARIA walks to-night;

    'Tis she that to these gardens gave
    That wondrous beauty which they have;
    She straightness on the woods bestows;
    To her the meadow sweetness owes;
    Nothing could make the river be
    So crystal pure, but only she,
    She yet more pure, sweet, straight, and fair
    Than gardens, woods, meads, rivers are.

    This 'tis to have been from the first
    In a domestic heaven nursed,
    Under the discipline severe
    Of FAIRFAX, and the starry VERE;
    Where not one object can come nigh
    But pure, and spotless as the eye,
    And goodness doth itself entail
    On females, if there want a male."

This poem, having a biographical value, I have quoted at, perhaps, too
great length. Other poems of this garden-period of Marvell's life are
better known. His own English version of his Latin poem _Hortus_
contains lovely stanzas:--

    "How vainly men themselves amaze
    To win the palm, the oak, or bays;
    And their uncessant labours see
    Crowned from some single herb or tree,
    Whose short and narrow-vergèd shade
    Does prudently their toils upbraid;
    While all the flowers and trees do close,
    To weave the garlands of Repose!

    Fair Quiet, have I found thee here,
    And Innocence, thy sister dear?
    Mistaken long, I sought you then
    In busy companies of men.
    Your sacred plants, if here below,
    Only among the plants will grow;
    Society is all but rude
    To this delicious solitude.

    No white nor red was ever seen
    So amorous as this lovely green.

    What wond'rous life is this I lead!
    Ripe apples drop about my head;
    The luscious clusters of the vine
    Upon my mouth do crush their wine;
    The nectarine, and curious peach,
    Into my hands themselves do reach;
    Stumbling on melons, as I pass,
    Insnared with flowers, I fall on grass.

    Meanwhile the mind, from pleasure less,
    Withdraws into its happiness;--
    The mind, that ocean where each kind
    Does straight its own resemblance find;--
    Yet it creates, transcending these,
    Far other worlds, and other seas,
    Annihilating all that's made
    To a green thought in a green shade."[46:1]

Well known as are Marvell's lines to his Coy Mistress, I have not the
heart to omit them, so eminently characteristic are they of his style
and humour:--

    "Had we but world enough and time,
    This coyness, lady, were no crime.
    We would sit down and think which way
    To walk, and pass our long love's day.
    Thou by the Indian Ganges' side
    Should'st rubies find: I by the tide
    Of Humber would complain. I would
    Love you ten years before the Flood,
    And you should, if you please, refuse
    Till the conversion of the Jews.
    My vegetable love should grow
    Vaster than empires and more slow.
    An hundred years should go to praise
    Thine eyes, and on thy forehead gaze;
    Two hundred to adore each breast,
    But thirty thousand to the rest;
    An age at least to every part,
    And the last age should show your heart.
    For, lady, you deserve this state,
    Nor would I love at lower rate.
      But at my back I always hear
    Time's wingèd chariot hurrying near,
    And yonder all before us lie
    Deserts of vast eternity.
    Thy beauty shall no more be found,
    Nor in thy marble vault shall sound
    My echoing song; then worms shall try
    That long-preserved virginity,
    And your quaint honour turn to dust,
    And into ashes all my lust.
    The grave's a fine and private place,
    But none, I think, do there embrace.
      Now, therefore, while the youthful hue
    Sits on thy skin like morning dew,
    And while thy willing soul transpires
    At every pore with instant fires,
    Now, let us sport us while we may;
    And now, like amorous birds of prey,
    Rather at once our time devour,
    Than languish in his slow-chapt power!
    Let us roll all our strength, and all
    Our sweetness up into one ball;
    And tear our pleasures with rough strife,
    Through the iron gates of life!
    Thus, though we cannot make our sun
    Stand still, yet we will make him run."

Mr. Aitken's valuable edition of Marvell's poems and satires can now be
had of all booksellers for two shillings,[47:1] and with these volumes
in his possession the judicious reader will be able to supply his own
reflections whilst life beneath the sun is still his. Poetry is a
personal matter. The very canons of criticism are themselves literature.
If we like the _Ars Poetica_, it is because we enjoy reading Horace.


FOOTNOTES:

[20:1] For an account of Flecknoe, see Southey's _Omniana_, i. 105. Lamb
placed some fine lines of Flecknoe's at the beginning of the Essay _A
Quakers' Meeting_.

[24:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 175.

[24:2] _See_ preface to _Religio Laici_, Scott's _Dryden_, vol. x. p.
27.

[24:3] Jeremy Collier in his _Historical Dictionary_ (1705) describes
Marvell, to whom he allows more space (though it is but a few lines)
than he does to Shakespeare, "as to his opinion he was a dissenter." In
Collier's opinion Marvell may have been no better than a dissenter, but
in fact he was a Churchman all his life, and it was Collier who lived to
become a non-juror and a dissenter, and a schismatical bishop to boot.

[31:1] _Life of Lord Fairfax_, by C.R. Markham (1870), p. 365.

[35:1] The fifth edition is dated 1703.

[46:1] Many a reader has made his first acquaintance with Marvell on
reading these lines in the _Essays of Elia_ (_The Old Benchers of the
Inner Temple_).

[47:1] _Poems and Satires of Andrew Marvell_, 2 vols. Routledge, 1905.




CHAPTER III

A CIVIL SERVANT IN THE TIME OF THE COMMONWEALTH


When Andrew Marvell first made John Milton's acquaintance is not known.
They must both have had common friends at or belonging to Cambridge.
Fairfax may have made the two men known to each other, although it is
just as likely that Milton introduced Marvell to Fairfax. All we know is
that when the engagement at Nunappleton House came to an end, Marvell,
being then minded to serve the State in some civil capacity, applied to
the Secretary for Foreign Tongues for what would now be called a
testimonial, which he was fortunate enough to obtain in the form of a
letter to the Lord-President of the Council, John Bradshaw. Milton seems
always to have liked Bradshaw, who was not generally popular even on his
own side, and in the _Defensio Secunda pro populo Anglicano_ extols his
character and attainments in sonorous latinity. Bradshaw had become in
February 1649 the first President of the new Council of State, which,
after the disappearance of the king and the abolition of the House of
Lords, took over the burden of the executive, and claimed the right to
scrape men's consciences by administering to anybody it chose an oath
requiring them to approve of what the House of Commons had done against
the king, and of their abolition of kingly government and of the House
of Peers, and that the legislative and supreme power was wholly in the
House of Commons.

Before the creation of this Council the duties of Latin Secretary to the
Parliament had been discharged by Georg Rudolph Weckherlin, a German
diplomat who had married an Englishwoman. He retired in bad health at
this time, and Milton was appointed to his place in 1649. When, later
on, the sight of the most illustrious of all our civil servants failed
him, Weckherlin returned to the office as Milton's assistant. In
December 1652 ill-health again compelled Weckherlin's retirement.[49:1]

Milton's letter to Bradshaw, who had made his home at Eton, is dated
February 21, 1653, and is as follows:--

   "MY LORD,--But that it would be an interruption to the
   public wherein your studies are perpetually employed, I should now
   and then venture to supply thus my enforced absence with a line or
   two, though it were onely my business, and that would be no slight
   one, to make my due acknowledgments of your many favours; which I
   both do at this time and ever shall; and have this farther, which I
   thought my part to let you know of, that there will be with you
   to-morrow upon some occasion of business a gentleman whose name is
   Mr. Marvile, a man whom both by report and the converse I have had
   with him of singular desert for the State to make use of, who also
   offers himself, if there be any employment for him. His father was
   the Minister of Hull, and he hath spent four years abroad in Holland,
   France, Italy, and Spain to very good purpose, as I believe, and the
   gaining of these four languages, besides he is a scholer and
   well-read in the Latin and Greek authors, and no doubt of an approved
   conversation, for he now comes lately out of the house of the Lord
   Fairfax, who was Generall, where he was intrusted to give some
   instructions in the languages to the Lady, his daughter. If upon the
   death of Mr. Weckerlyn the Councell shall think that I shall need any
   assistance in the performance of my place (though for my part I find
   no encumbrance of that which belongs to me, except it be in point of
   attendance at Conferences with Ambassadors, which I must confess in
   my condition I am not fit for) it would be hard for them to find a
   man so fit every way for that purpose as this gentleman: one who, I
   believe, in a short time would be able to do them as much service as
   Mr. Ascan. This, my Lord, I write sincerely without any other end
   than to perform my duty to the publick in helping them to an humble
   servant; laying aside those jealousies and that emulation which mine
   own condition might suggest to me by bringing in such a coadjutor;
   and remain, my Lord, your most obliged and faithful servant,
                                                          JOHN MILTON.

   "_Feb. 21, 1652_ (O.S.)."

   Addressed: "For the Honourable the Lord Bradshawe."

No handsomer testimonial than this was ever penned. It was unsuccessful.
When Milton wrote to Bradshaw, Weckherlin was in fact dead, and on his
retirement in the previous December, John Thurloe, the very handy
Secretary of the Council, had for the time assumed Weckherlin's duties,
and obtained on that score an addition to his salary. No actual vacancy,
therefore, occurred on Weckherlin's death. None the less, shortly
afterwards, Philip Meadows, also a Cambridge man, was appointed Milton's
assistant, and Marvell had to wait four years longer for his place.

When Marvell's connection with Eton first began is not to be
ascertained. His friend, John Oxenbridge, who had been driven from his
tutorship at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, by Laud in 1634 to

    "Where the remote Bermudas ride,"

but had returned home, became in 1652 a Fellow of Eton College. Oliver
St. John, who at this time was Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, and had married Oxenbridge's sister, was known to Marvell,
and may have introduced him to his brother-in-law. At all events Marvell
frequently visited Eton, where, however, he had the good sense to
frequent not merely the cloisters, but the poor lodgings where the "ever
memorable" John Hales, ejected from his fellowship, spent the last years
of his life.

   "I account it no small honour to have grown up into some part of his
   acquaintance and conversed awhile with the living remains of one of
   the clearest heads and best prepared breasts in Christendom."[51:1]

Hales died in 1656, and his _Golden Remains_ were first published three
years later. Marvell's words of panegyric are singularly well chosen. It
is a curious commentary upon the confused times of the Civil War and
Restoration that perhaps never before, and seldom, if ever, since, has
England contained so many clear heads and well-prepared breasts as it
did then. Small indeed is the influence of men of thought upon their
immediate surroundings.

The Lord Bradshaw, we know, had a home in Eton, and on the occasion of
one of Marvell's evidently frequent visits to the Oxenbridges, Milton
entrusted him with a letter to Bradshaw and a presentation copy of the
_Secunda defensio_. Marvell delivered both letter and book, and seems at
once to have informed the distinguished author that he had done so. But
alas for the vanity of the writing man! The sublime poet, who in his
early manhood had composed _Lycidas_, and was in his old age to write
_Paradise Lost_, demanded further and better particulars as to the
precise manner in which the chief of his office received, not only the
book, but the letter which accompanied it. Nobody is now left to think
much of Bradshaw, but in 1654 he was an excellent representative of the
class Carlyle was fond of describing as the _alors célèbre_. Prompted by
this desire, Milton must have written to Marvell hinting, as he well
knew how to do, his surprise at the curtness of his friend's former
communication, and Marvell's reply to this letter has come down to us.
It is Marvell's glory that long before _Paradise Lost_ he recognised the
essential greatness of the blind secretary, and his letter is a fine
example of the mode of humouring a great man. Be it remembered, as we
read, that this letter was not addressed to one of the greatest names in
literature, but to a petulant and often peevish scholar, living of
necessity in great retirement, whose name is never once mentioned by
Clarendon, and about whom the voluminous Thurloe, who must have seen him
hundreds of times, has nothing to say except that he was "a blind man
who wrote Latin letters." Odder still, perhaps, Richard Baxter, whose
history of his own life and times is one of the most informing books in
the world, never so much as mentions the one and only man whose name
can, without any violent sense of unfitness, be given to the age about
which Baxter was writing so laboriously.

   "HONOURED SIR,--I did not satisfie my self in the account I
   gave you of presentinge your Book to my Lord, although it seemed to
   me that I writ to you all which the messenger's speedy returne the
   same night from Eaton would permit me; and I perceive that, by reason
   of that hast, I did not give you satisfaction neither concerninge the
   delivery of your Letter at the same time. Be pleased therefore to
   pardon me and know that I tendered them both together. But my Lord
   read not the Letter while I was with him, which I attributed to our
   despatch, and some other businesse tendinge thereto, which I
   therefore wished ill to, so farr as it hindred an affaire much better
   and of greater importance, I mean that of reading your Letter. And to
   tell you truly mine own imagination, I thought that he would not open
   it while I was there, because he might suspect that I, delivering it
   just upon my departure, might have brought in it some second
   proposition like to that which you had before made to him by your
   Letter to my advantage. However, I assure myself that he has since
   read it, and you, that he did then witnesse all respecte to your
   person, and as much satisfaction concerninge your work as could be
   expected from so cursory a review and so sudden an account as he
   could then have of it from me. Mr. Oxenbridge, at his returne from
   London, will, I know, give you thanks for his book, as I do with all
   acknowledgement and humility for that you have sent me. I shall now
   studie it even to the getting of it by heart; esteeming it, according
   to my poore judgment (which yet I wish it were so right in all things
   else), as the most compendious scale for so much to the height of the
   Roman Eloquence, when I consider how equally it turnes and rises with
   so many figures it seems to me a Trajan's columne, in whose winding
   ascent we see imboss'd the severall monuments of your learned
   victoryes: And Salmatius and Morus make up as great a triumph as that
   of Decebalus, whom too, for ought I know, you shall have forced, as
   Trajan the other, to make themselves away out of a just desperation.
   I have an affectionate curiousity to know what becomes of Colonell
   Overton's businesse. And am exceeding glad that Mr. Skynner is got
   near you, the happinesse which I at the same time congratulate to him
   and envie, there being none who doth, if I may so say, more jealously
   honour you then, Honoured Sir, Your most affectionate humble servant,
                                                       ANDREW MARVELL.

   "Eaton, _June 2, 1654._"

   Addressed: "For my most honoured friend,
                  John Milton, Esquire, Secretarye
                     for the Forrain affaires
                        at his house in Petty France,
                           Westminster."

To conclude Marvell's Eton experiences; in 1657, and very shortly before
his obtaining his appointment as Milton's assistant in the place of
Philip Meadows, who was sent on a mission to Lisbon, Marvell was chosen
by the Lord-Protector to be tutor at Eton to Cromwell's ward, Mr.
Dutton, and took up his residence with his pupil with the Oxenbridges.
The following letter, addressed by Marvell to Oliver, will be read with
interest:--

   "May it please your Excellence,--It might, perhaps, seem fit for me
   to seek out words to give your Excellence thanks for myself. But,
   indeed, the only civility which it is proper for me to practice with
   so eminent a person is to obey you, and to perform honestly the work
   that you have set me about. Therefore I shall use the time that your
   Lordship is pleased to allow me for writing, onely for that purpose
   for which you have given me it; that is, to render you an account of
   Mr. Dutton. I have taken care to examine him several times in the
   presence of Mr. Oxenbridge, as those who weigh and tell over money
   before some witnesse ere they take charge of it; for I thought that
   there might be possibly some lightness in the coyn, or errour in the
   telling, which hereafter I should be bound to make good. Therefore,
   Mr. Oxenbridge is the best to make your Excellency an impartial
   relation thereof: I shall only say, that I shall strive according to
   my best understanding (that is, according to those rules your
   Lordship hath given me) to increase whatsoever talent he may have
   already. Truly, he is of gentle and waxen disposition; and God be
   praised, I cannot say he hath brought with him any evil impression;
   and I shall hope to set nothing into his spirit but what may be of a
   good sculpture. He hath in him two things that make youth most easy
   to be managed,--modesty, which is the bridle to vice; and emulation,
   which is the spur to virtue. And the care which your Excellence is
   pleased to take of him is no small encouragement and shall be so
   represented to him; but, above all, I shall labour to make him
   sensible of his duty to God; for then we begin to serve faithfully,
   when we consider He is our master. And in this, both he and I owe
   infinitely to your Lordship, for having placed us in so godly a
   family as that of Mr. Oxenbridge, whose doctrine and example are like
   a book and a map, not only instructing the ear, but demonstrating to
   the eye, which way we ought to travell; and Mrs. Oxenbridge has
   looked so well to him, that he hath already much mended his
   complexion; and now she is ordering his chamber, that he may delight
   to be in it as often as his studys require. For the rest, most of
   this time hath been spent in acquainting ourselves with him; and
   truly he is chearfull, and I hope thinks us to be good company. I
   shall, upon occasion, henceforward inform your Excellence of any
   particularities in our little affairs, for so I esteem it to be my
   duty. I have no more at present, but to give thanks to God for your
   Lordship, and to beg grace of Him, that I may approve myself, Your
   Excellency's most humble and faithful servant,
                                                       ANDREW MARVELL.

   "Windsor, _July 28, 1653_.

   "Mr. Dutton[55:1] presents his most humble service to your
   Excellence."

Something must now be said of Marvell's literary productions during this
period, 1652-1657. It was in 1653 that he began his stormy career as an
anonymous political poet and satirist. The Dutch were his first victims,
good Protestants though they were. Marvell never liked the Dutch, and
had he lived to see the Revolution must have undergone some qualms.

In 1652 the Commonwealth was at war with the United Provinces. Trade
jealousy made the war what politicians call "inevitable." This jealousy
of the Dutch dates back to Elizabeth, and to the first stirring in the
womb of time of the British navy. This may be readily perceived if we
read Dr. John Dee's "Petty Navy Royal," 1577, and "A Politic Plat (plan)
for the Honour of the Prince," 1580, and, somewhat later in date,
"England's Way to Win Wealth," 1614.[56:1]

These short tracts make two things quite plain--first, the desire to get
our share of the foreign fishing trade, then wholly in the hands of the
Dutch; and second, the recognition that England was a sea-empire,
dependent for its existence upon a great navy manned by the seafaring
inhabitants of our coasts.

The enormous fishing trade done in our own waters by the Dutch, the
splendid fleet of fishing craft with twenty thousand handy sailors on
board, ready by every 1st of June to sail out of the Maas, the Texel,
and the Vlie, to catch herring in the North Sea, excited admiration,
envy, and almost despair.

   "O, slothful England and careless countrymen! look but on these
   fellows that we call the plump Hollanders! Behold their diligence in
   fishing and our most careless negligence! Six hundred of these
   fisherships and more be great Busses, some six score tons, most of
   them be a hundred tons, and the rest three score tons and fifty tons;
   the biggest of them having four and twenty men, some twenty men, and
   some eighteen or sixteen men apiece. So there cannot be in this fleet
   of People no less than twenty thousand sailors.... No king upon the
   earth did ever see such a fleet of his own subjects at any time, and
   yet this fleet is there and then yearly to be seen. A most worthy
   sight it were, if they were my own countrymen, yet have I taken
   pleasure in being amongst them, to behold the neatness of their ships
   and fishermen, how every man knoweth his own place, and all labouring
   merrily together.[57:1]

   "Now, in our sum of fishermen, let us see what vent have we for our
   fish in other countries, and what commodities and corn is brought
   into this Kingdom? And what ships are set in work by them whereby
   mariners are best employed. Not one. It is pitiful! ... This last
   year at Yarmouth there were three hundred idle men that could get
   nothing to do, living very poor for lack of employment, which most
   gladly would have gone to sea in Pinks if there had been any for them
   to go in.... And this last year the Hollanders did lade 12 sail of
   Holland ships with red herrings at Yarmouth for Civita Vecchia,
   Leghorn and Genoa and Marseilles and Toulon. Most of these being
   laden by the English merchants. So that if this be suffered the
   English owners of ships shall have but small employment for
   them."[57:2]

Nor was the other aspect of the case lost sight of. How can a great navy
necessary for our sea-empire be manned otherwise than by a race of brave
sea-faring men, accustomed from their infancy to handle boats?

   "Fourthly, how many thousands of soldiers of all degrees would be by
   these means not only hardened well to brook all rage and disturbance
   of sea, but also would be well practised and trained to great
   perfection of understanding all manner of fight and service of sea,
   so that in time of great need that expert and hardy crew of some
   thousands of sea-soldiers would be to this realm a treasure
   incomparable.[58:1]

   "We see the Hollanders being well fed in fishing affairs and stronger
   and lustier than the sailors who use the long Southern voyages, but
   these courageous, young, lusty, strong-fed younkers that shall be
   bred in the Busses, when His Majesty shall have occasion for their
   service in war against the enemy, will be fellows for the nonce! and
   will put more strength to an iron crow at a piece of great ordnance
   in training of a cannon, or culvining with the direction of the
   experimented master Gunner, then two or three of the forenamed
   surfeited sailors. And in distress of wind-grown sea and foul
   winter's weather, for flying forward to their labour, for pulling in
   a top-sail or a sprit-sail, or shaking off a bonnet in a dark night!
   for wet or cold cannot make them shrink nor stain, that the North
   Seas and the Busses and Pinks have dyed in the grain for such
   purposes."[58:2]

The years, as they went by, only served to increase English jealousy of
the Dutch, who not only fished our water but did the carrying trade of
the world. It was no rare sight to see Yarmouth full of Dutch bottoms,
and Dutch sailors loading them with English goods.

In the early days of the Commonwealth the painfulness of the situation
was accentuated by the fact that some of our colonies or plantations, as
they were then called--Virginia and the Barbadoes, for example--stuck to
the king and gave a commercial preference to the Dutch, shipping their
produce to all parts of the world exclusively in Dutch bottoms. This was
found intolerable, and in October 1651 the Long Parliament, nearing its
violent end, passed the first Navigation Act, of which Ranke says: "Of
all the acts ever passed in Parliament, it is perhaps the one which
brought about the most important results for England and the
world."[59:1]

The Navigation Act provided "that all goods from countries beyond Europe
should be imported into England in English ships only; and all European
goods either in English ships or in ships belonging to the countries
from which these articles originally came."

This was a challenge indeed.

Another perpetual source of irritation was the Right of Search, that is,
the right of stopping neutral ships and searching their cargoes for
contraband. England asserted this right as against the Dutch, who, as
the world's carriers, were most subject to the right, and not
unnaturally denied its existence.

War was declared in 1652, and made the fame of two great admirals, Blake
and Van Tromp. Oliver's spirit was felt on the seas, and before many
months were over England had captured more than a thousand Dutch trading
vessels, and brought business to a standstill in Amsterdam--then the
great centre of commercial interests. When six short years afterwards
the news of Cromwell's death reached that city, its inhabitants greatly
rejoiced, crowding the streets and crying "the Devil is dead."

Andrew Marvell was impregnated with the new ideas about sea-power. A
great reader and converser with the best intellects of his time, and a
Hull man, he had probably early grasped the significance of Bacon's
illuminating saying in the famous essay on the _True Greatness of
Kingdoms and Estates_ (first printed in 1612), "that he that commands
the sea is at great liberty and may take as much and as little of the
war as he will." Cromwell, though not the creator of our navy, was its
strongest inspiration until Nelson, and no feature of his great
administration so excited Marvell's patriotic admiration as the
Lord-Protector's sleepless energy in securing and maintaining the
command of the sea.

In Marvell's poem, first published as a broadsheet in 1655, entitled
_The First Anniversary of the Government under His Highness the
Lord-Protector_, he describes foreign princes soundly rating their
ambassadors for having misinformed them as to the energies of the new
Commonwealth:--

    "'Is this,' saith one, 'the nation that we read
    Spent with both wars, under a Captain dead!
    Yet rig a navy while we dress us late
    And ere we dine rase and rebuild a state?
    What oaken forests, and what golden mines,
    What mints of men--what union of designs!
    ...
    Needs must we all their tributaries be
    Whose navies hold the sluices of the sea!
    _The ocean is the fountain of command_,
    But that once took, we captives are on land;
    And those that have the waters for their share
    Can quickly leave us neither earth nor air.'"

Marvell's aversion to the Dutch was first displayed in the rough lines
called _The Character of Holland_, published in 1653 during the first
Dutch War. As poetry the lines have no great merit; they do not even
jingle agreeably--but they are full of the spirit of the time, and
breathe forth that "envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness"
which are apt to be such large ingredients in the compound we call
"patriotism." They begin thus:--

    "Holland, that scarce deserves the name of land,
    As but the off-scouring of the British sand,
    And so much earth as was contributed
    By English pilots when they heaved the lead,
    Or what by the ocean's slow alluvion feel
    Of shipwrecked cockle and the muscle-shell,--
    This indigested vomit of the sea
    Fell to the Dutch by just propriety."

The gallant struggle to secure their country from the sea is made the
subject of curious banter:--

    "How did they rivet with gigantic piles,
    Thorough the centre their new-catched miles,
    And to the stake a struggling country bound,
    Where barking waves still bait the forced ground,
    Building their watery Babel far more high,
    To reach the sea, than those to scale the sky!
    Yet still his claim the injured ocean laid,
    And oft at leap-frog o'er their steeples played,
    As if on purpose it on land had come
    To show them what's their _mare liberum_.
    A daily deluge over them does boil;
    The earth and water play at level coil.
    The fish ofttimes the burgher dispossessed,
    And sat, not as a meat, but as a guest."

This final conceit greatly tickled the fancy of Charles Lamb, who was
perhaps the first of the moderns to rediscover both the rare merits and
the curiosities of our author. Hazlitt thought poorly of the jest.[61:1]

Marvell proceeds with his ridicule to attack the magistrates:--

    "For, as with pygmies, who best kills the crane;
    Among the hungry, he that treasures grain;
    Among the blind, the one-eyed blinkard reigns;
    So rules among the drowned, he that drains:
    Not who first see the rising sun, commands,
    But who could first discern the rising lands;
    Who best could know to pump an earth so leak,
    Him they their Lord, and Country's Father, speak;
    To make a bank, was a great plot of state;
    Invent a shovel, and be a magistrate."[62:1]

When the war-fever was raging such humour as this may well have passed
muster with the crowd.

The incident--there is always an "incident"--which served as the actual
excuse for hostilities, is referred to as follows:--

    "Let this one courtesy witness all the rest,
    When their whole navy they together pressed,
    Not Christian captives to redeem from bands,
    Or intercept the western golden sands,
    No, but all ancient rights and leagues must fail,
    _Rather than to the English strike their sail_;
    To whom their weather-beaten province owes
    Itself."

Two spirited lines describe the discomfiture of Van Tromp:--

    "And the torn navy staggered with him home
    While the sea laughed itself into a foam."

This first Dutch War came to an end in 1654, when Holland was compelled
to acknowledge the supremacy of the English flag in the home waters, and
to acquiesce in the Navigation Act. It is a curious commentary upon the
black darkness that conceals the future, that Cromwell, dreading as he
did the House of Orange and the youthful grandson of Charles the First,
who at the appointed hour was destined to deal the House of Stuart a far
deadlier stroke than Cromwell had been able to do, either on the field
of battle or in front of Whitehall, refused to ratify the Treaty of
Peace with the Dutch until John De Witt had obtained an Act excluding
the Prince of Orange from ever filling the office of Stadtholder of the
Province of Holland.

The contrast between the glory of Oliver's Dutch War and the shame of
Charles the Second's sank deep into Marvell's heart, and lent bitterness
to many of his later satirical lines.

Marvell's famous _Horatian Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland_ in
1650 has a curious bibliographical interest. So far as we can tell, it
was first published in 1776. When it was composed we do not know. At
Nunappleton House Oliver was not a _persona grata_ in 1650, for he had
no sooner come back from Ireland than he had stepped into the shoes of
the Lord-General Fairfax; and there were those, Lady Fairfax, I doubt
not, among the number, who believed that the new Lord-General thought it
was high time he should be where Fairfax's "scruple" at last put him. We
may be sure Cromwell's character was dissected even more than it was
extolled at Nunappleton. The famous Ode is by no means a panegyric, and
its true hero is the "Royal actor," whom Cromwell, so the poem suggests,
lured to his doom. It is not likely that the Ode was composed after
Marvell had left Nunappleton, though it may have been so before he went
there. There is an old untraceable tradition that Marvell was among the
crowd that saw the king die. What deaths have been witnessed, and with
what strange apparent apathy, by the London crowd! But for this
tradition one's imagination would trace to Lady Fairfax the most famous
of the stanzas.

But to return to the history of the Ode. In 1776 Captain Edward
Thompson, a connection of the Marvell family and a versatile sailor with
a passion for print, which had taken some odd forms of expression,
produced by subscription in three quarto volumes the first collected
edition of Andrew Marvell's works, both verse and prose. Such an edition
had been long premeditated by Thomas Hollis, one of the best friends
literature had in the eighteenth century. It was Hollis who gave to
Sidney Sussex College the finest portrait in existence of Oliver
Cromwell. Hollis collected material for an edition of Marvell with the
aid of Richard Barron, an early editor of Milton's prose works, and of
Algernon Sidney's _Discourse concerning Government_. Barron, however,
lost zeal as the task proceeded, and complained justly enough "of a want
of anecdotes," and as the printer, the well-known and accomplished
Bowyer, doubted the wisdom of the undertaking, it was allowed to drop.
Barron died in 1766, and Hollis in 1774, but the collections made by the
latter passed into the hands of Captain Thompson, who, with the
assistance of Mr. Robert Nettleton, a grandson of one of Marvell's
sisters, at once began to get his edition ready. On Nettleton's death
his "Marvell" papers came into Thompson's hands, and among them was, to
quote the captain's own words, "a volume of Mr. Marvell's poems, some
written with his own hand and the rest copied by his order."

The _Horatian Ode_ was in this volume, and was printed from it in
Thompson's edition of 1776.

What has become of this manuscript book? It has disappeared--destroyed,
so we are led to believe, in a fit of temper by the angry and uncritical
sea-captain.

This precious volume undoubtedly contained some poems by Marvell, and as
his handwriting was both well known from many examples, and is highly
characteristic, we may also be certain that the captain was not mistaken
in his assertion that some of these poems were in Marvell's own
handwriting. But, as ill-luck would have it, the volume also contained
poems written at a later period and in quite another hand. Among these
latter pieces were Addison's verses, _The Spacious Firmament on High_
and _When all thy Mercies, O my God_; Dr. Watts' paraphrase _When Israel
freed from Pharaoh's Hand_; and Mallet's ballad _William and Margaret_.
The two Addison pieces and the Watts paraphrase appeared for the first
time in the _Spectator_, Nos. 453, 465, and 461, in 1712, and Mallet's
ballad was first printed in 1724.

Still there these pieces were, in manuscript, in this volume, and as
there were circumstances of mystification attendant upon their prior
publication, what does the captain do but claim them all, _Songs of
Zion_ and sentimental ballad alike, as Marvell's. This of course brought
the critics, ever anxious to air their erudition, down upon his head,
raised his anger, and occasioned the destruction of the book.

Mr. Grosart says that Captain Thompson states that the _Horatian Ode_
was in Marvell's handwriting. I cannot discover where this statement is
made, though it is made of other poems in the volume, also published for
the first time by the captain.

All, therefore, we know is that the Ode was first published in 1776 by
an editor who says he found it copied in a book, subsequently destroyed,
which contained (among other things) some poems written in Marvell's
handwriting, and that this book was given to the editor by a
grand-nephew of the poet.

Yet I imagine, poor as this evidence may seem to be, no student of
Marvell's life and character (so far as his life reveals his character),
and of his verse (so much of it as is positively known), wants more
evidence to satisfy him that the _Horatian Ode_ is as surely Marvell's
as the lines upon _Appleton House_, the _Bermudas_, _To his Coy
Mistress_, and _The Garden_.

The great popularity of this Ode undoubtedly rests on the three
stanzas:--

    "That thence the royal actor borne,
    The tragic scaffold might adorn,
      While round the armèd bands;
      Did clap their bloody hands:

    He nothing common did, or mean,
    Upon that memorable scene,
      But with his keener eye
      The axe's edge did try;

    Nor called the gods with vulgar spite
    To vindicate his helpless right,
      But bowed his comely head
      Down, as upon a bed."

It is strange that the death of the king should be so nobly sung in an
Ode bearing Cromwell's name and dedicate to his genius:--

    "So restless Cromwell could not cease
    In the inglorious arts of peace,
      But through adventurous war
      Urgèd his active star;

    ...

    Then burning through the air he went,
    And palaces and temples rent;
      And Cæsar's head at last
      Did through his laurels blast.

    'Tis madness to resist or blame
    The force of angry Heaven's flame;
      And if we would speak true,
      Much to the man is due,

    Who, from his private gardens, where
    He lived reservèd and austere,
      (As if his highest plot
      To plant the bergamot),

    Could by industrious valour climb
    To ruin the great work of time,
      And cast the kingdoms old
      Into another mould."

The last stanzas of all have much pith and meaning in them:--

    "But thou, the war's and fortune's son,
    March indefatigably on!
      And for the last effect,
      Still keep the sword erect.

    Besides the force it has to fright
    The spirits of the shady night,
      The same arts that did gain
      A power, must it maintain."[67:1]

It is not surprising that this Ode was not published in 1650--if indeed
it was the work of that, and not of a later year. There is nothing
either of the courtier or of the partisan about its stately
versification and sober, solemn thought. Entire self-possession,
dignity, criticism of a great man and a strange career by one well
entitled to criticise, are among the chief characteristics of this noble
poem. It is infinitely refreshing, when reading and thinking about
Cromwell, to get as far away as possible from the fanatic's scream and
the fury of the bigot, whether of the school of Laud or Hobbes. Andrew
Marvell knew Oliver Cromwell alive, and gazed on his features as he lay
dead--he knew his ambition, his greatness, his power, and where that
power lay. How much might we unwittingly have lost, if Captain Thompson
had not printed a poem which for more than a century of years had
remained unknown, and exposed to all the risks of a single manuscript
copy!

When Cromwell sent his picture to Queen Christina of Sweden to
commemorate the peace he concluded with her in 1654, Marvell, though not
then attached to the public service, was employed to write the Latin
couplet that accompanied the picture. He discharged his task as
follows:--

    _In effigiem Oliveri Cromwell_.

    "Hæc est quæ toties inimicos umbra fugavit
      At sub quâ cives otia lenta terunt."

The authorship of these lines is often attributed to Milton, but there
is little doubt they are of Marvell's composition. They might easily
have been better.

Marvell became Milton's assistant in September 1657, and the friendship
between the two men was thus consolidated by the strong ties of a
common duty. Milton's blindness making him unfit to attend the reception
of foreign embassies, Marvell took his place and joined in respectfully
greeting the Dutch ambassadors. After all he was but a junior clerk,
still he doubtless rejoiced that his lines on Holland had been published
anonymously. Literature was strongly represented in this department of
State just then, for Cromwell's Chamberlain, Sir Gilbert Pickering, who
represented Northamptonshire in Parliament, had taken occasion to
introduce his nephew, John Dryden, to the public service, and he was
attached to the same office as Andrew Marvell. Poets, like pigeons, have
often taken shelter under our public roofs, but Milton, Marvell, and
Dryden, all at the same time, form a remarkable constellation. Old Noll,
we may be sure, had nothing to do with it. Marvell must have known
Cromwell personally; but there is nothing to show that Milton and
Cromwell ever met. The popular engraving which represents a theatrical
Lord-Protector dictating despatches to a meek Milton is highly
ludicrous. Cromwell could have as easily dictated a book of _Paradise
Lost_, on the composition of which Milton began to be engaged during the
last year of the Protectorate, as one of Milton's despatches.

In April 1657 Admiral Blake, the first great name in the annals of our
navy, performed his last feat of arms by destroying the Spanish West
Indian fleet at Santa Cruz without the loss of an English vessel. The
gallant sailor died of fever on his way home, and was buried according
to his deserts in the Abbey. His body, with that of his master, was by a
vote of Parliament, December 4, 1660, taken from the grave and drawn to
the gallows-tree, and there hanged and buried under it. Pepys, who was
to know something of naval administration under the second Charles, has
his reflections on this unpleasing incident.

Marvell's lines on Blake's victory over the Spaniards are not worthy of
so glorious an occasion, but our great doings by land and sea have
seldom been suitably recorded in verse. Drayton's _Song of Agincourt_ is
imperishable, but was composed nearly two centuries after the battle.
The wail of Flodden Field still floats over the Border; but Miss
Elliot's famous ballad was published in 1765. Even the Spanish Armada
had to wait for Macaulay's spirited fragment. Mr. Addison's _Blenheim_
stirred no man's blood; no poet sang Chatham's victories.[70:1] Campbell
at a later day did better. We must be content with what we get.

Marvell's poem contains some vigorous lines, which show he was a good
hater:--

    "Now does Spain's fleet her spacious wings unfold,
    Leaves the new world, and hastens for the old;
    But though the wind was fair, they slowly swum,
    Freighted with acted guilt, and guilt to come;
    For this rich load, of which so proud they are,
    Was raised by tyranny, and raised for war.
    ...
    ...
    For now upon the main themselves they saw
    That boundless empire, where you give the law."

The Canary Islands are rapturously described--their delightful climate
and their excellent wine. Obviously they should be annexed:--

    "The best of lands should have the best of Kings."

The fight begins. "Bold Stayner leads" and "War turned the temperate to
the torrid zone":--

    "Fate these two fleets, between both worlds, had brought
    Who fight, as if for both those worlds they fought.
    ...
    ...
    The all-seeing sun ne'er gazed on such a sight,
    Two dreadful navies there at anchor fight,
    And neither have, or power, or will, to fly;
    There one must conquer, or there both must die."

Blake sinks the Spanish ships:--

    "Their galleons sunk, their wealth the sea does fill,
    The only place where it can cause no ill";

and the poet concludes:--

    "Ah! would those treasures which both Indias have
    Were buried in as large, and deep a grave!
    War's chief support with them would buried be,
    And the land owe her peace unto the sea.
    Ages to come your conquering arms will bless.
    There they destroyed what had destroyed their peace;
    And in one war the present age may boast,
    The certain seeds of many wars are lost."

Good politics, if but second-rate poetry. This was the last time the
Spanish war-cry _Santiago, y cierra España_ rang in hostility in English
ears.

Turning for a moment from war to love, on the 19th of November 1657
Cromwell's third daughter, the Lady Mary Cromwell, was married to
Viscount, afterwards Earl, Fauconberg. The Fauconbergs took revolutions
calmly and, despite the disinterment of their great relative, accepted
the Restoration gladly and lived to chuckle over the Revolution. The
forgetfulness, no less than the vindictiveness, of men is often
surprising. Marvell, who played the part of Laureate during the
Protectorate, produced two songs for the conventionally joyful
occasion. The second of the two is decidedly pretty for a November
wedding:--

    "_Hobbinol._ PHILLIS, TOMALIN, away!
                 Never such a merry day,
                 For the northern shepherd's son
                 Has MENALCAS' daughter won.

    _Phillis._   Stay till I some flowers have tied
                 In a garland for the bride.

    _Tomalin._   If thou would'st a garland bring,
                 PHILLIS, you may wait the spring:
                 They have chosen such an hour
                 When she is the only flower.

    _Phillis._   Let's not then, at least, be seen
                 Without each a sprig of green.

    _Hobbinol._  Fear not; at MENALCAS' hall
                 There are bays enough for all.
                 He, when young as we, did graze,
                 But when old he planted bays.

    _Tomalin._   Here she comes; but with a look
                 Far more catching than my hook;
                 'Twas those eyes, I now dare swear,
                 Led our lambs we knew not where.

    _Hobbinol._  Not our lambs' own fleeces are
                 Curled so lovely as her hair,
                 Nor our sheep new-washed can be
                 Half so white or sweet as she.

    _Phillis._   He so looks as fit to keep
                 Somewhat else than silly sheep.

    _Hobbinol._  Come, let's in some carol new
                 Pay to love and them their due.

    _All._  Joy to that happy pair
            Whose hopes united banish our despair.
            What shepherd could for love pretend,
            Whilst all the nymphs on Damon's choice attend?
            What shepherdess could hope to wed
            Before Marina's turn were sped?
            Now lesser beauties may take place
            And meaner virtues come in play;
                    While they
                Looking from high
                    Shall grace
            Our flocks and us with a propitious eye."

All this merriment came to an end on the 3rd of September 1658, when
Oliver Cromwell died on the anniversary of Dunbar fight and of the field
of Worcester. And yet the end, though it was to be sudden, did not at
once seem likely to be so. There was time for the poets to tune their
lyres. Waller, Dryden, Sprat, and Marvell had no doubt that "Tumbledown
Dick" was to sit on the throne of his father and "still keep the sword
erect," and were ready with their verses.

Westminster Abbey has never witnessed a statelier, costlier funeral than
that of "the late man who made himself to be called Protector," to quote
words from one of the most impressive passages in English prose, the
opening sentences of Cowley's _Discourse by way of Vision concerning the
Government of Oliver Cromwell_. The representatives of kings,
potentates, and powers crowded the aisles, and all was done that pomp
and ceremony could do. Marvell, arrayed in the six yards of mourning the
Council had voted him on the 7th of September, was, we may be sure, in
the Abbey, and it may well be that his blind colleague, to whom the same
liberal allowance had been made, leant on his arm during the service.
Milton's muse remained silent. The vote of the House of Commons ordering
the undoing of this great ceremony was little more than two years ahead.
_O caeca mens hominum!_

Among the poems first printed by Captain Thompson from the old
manuscript book was one which was written therein in Marvell's own hand
entitled "A poem upon the Death of his late Highness the Protector." Its
composition was evidently not long delayed:--

    "We find already what those omens mean,
    Earth ne'er more glad nor Heaven more serene.
    Cease now our griefs, calm peace succeeds a war,
    Rainbows to storms, Richard to Oliver."

The lines best worth remembering in the poem are the following:--

    "I saw him dead: a leaden slumber lies,
    And mortal sleep over those wakeful eyes;
    Those gentle rays under the lids were fled,
    Which through his looks that piercing sweetness shed;
    That port, which so majestic was and strong,
    Loose, and deprived of vigour, stretched along;
    All withered, all discoloured, pale and wan,
    How much another thing, no more that man!
    O, human glory vain! O, Death! O, wings!
    O, worthless world! O, transitory things!
    Yet dwelt that greatness in his shape decayed,
    That still though dead, greater than Death he laid,
    And in his altered face you something feign
    That threatens Death, he yet will live again."


FOOTNOTES:

[49:1] In 1659 Clarendon, then Sir Edward Hyde, and in Brussels, writing
to Sir Richard Fanshaw, says, "You are the secretary of the Latin tongue
and I will mend the warrant you sent, and have it despatched as soon as
I hear again from you, but I must tell you the place in itself, if it be
not dignified by the person who hath some other qualification, is not to
be valued. There is no signet belongs to it, which can be only kept by a
Secretary of State, from whom the Latin Secretary always receives orders
and prepares no despatches without his direction, and hath only a fee of
a hundred pound a year. And therefore, except it hath been in the hands
of a person who hath had some other employment, it hath fallen to the
fortune of inconsiderable men as Weckerlin was the last" (_Hist. MSS.
Com._, _Heathcote Papers_, 1899, p. 9).

[51:1] _The Rehearsal Transprosed_.--Grosart, iii. 126.

[55:1] Even Mr. Firth can tell me nothing about this Ward of Cromwell's.

[56:1] For reprints of these tracts, see _Social England Illustrated_,
Constable and Co., 1903.

[57:1] "England's Way to Win Wealth." See _Social England Illustrated_,
p. 253.

[57:2] _Ibid._ p. 265.

[58:1] Dr. Dee's "Petty Navy Royal." _Social England Illustrated_, p.
46.

[58:2] "England's Way to Win Wealth." _Social England Illustrated_, p.
268.

[59:1] Ranke's _History of England during the Seventeenth Century_, vol.
iii. p. 68.

[61:1] See Leigh Hunt's _Wit and Humour_ (1846), pp. 38, 237.

[62:1] Butler's lines, _A Description of Holland_, are very like
Marvell's:--

    "A Country that draws fifty foot of water
    In which men live as in a hold of nature.
    ...
    ...
    They dwell in ships, like swarms of rats, and prey
    Upon the goods all nations' fleets convey;
    ...
    ...
    That feed like cannibals on other fishes,
    And serve their cousin-germans up in dishes:
    A land that rides at anchor and is moor'd,
    In which they do not live but go aboard."

Marvell and Butler were rival wits, but Holland was a common butt; so
powerful a motive is trade jealousy.

[67:1] "To one unacquainted with Horace, this Ode, not perhaps so
perfect as his are in form, and with occasional obscurities of
expression, which Horace would not have left, will give a truer notion
of the kind of greatness which he achieved than could, so far as I know,
be obtained from any other poem in our language."--_Dean Trench_.

[70:1] "In the last war, when France was disgraced and overpowered in
every quarter of the globe, when Spain coming to her assistance only
shared her calamities, and the name of an Englishman was reverenced
through Europe, no poet was heard amidst the general acclamation; the
fame of our counsellors and heroes was entrusted to the gazetteer."--Dr.
Johnson's _Life of Prior_.




CHAPTER IV

IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS


Cromwell's death was an epoch in Marvell's history. Up to that date he
had, since he left the University, led the life of a scholar, with a
turn for business, and was known to many as an agreeable companion and a
lively wit. He was keenly interested in public affairs, and personally
acquainted with some men in great place, and for a year before
Cromwell's death he had been in a branch of the Civil Service; but of
the wear and tear, the strife and contention, of what are called
"practical politics" he knew nothing from personal experience.

Within a year of the Protector's death all this was changed and, for the
rest of his days, with but the shortest of occasional intervals, Andrew
Marvell led the life of an active, eager member of Parliament, knowing
all that was going on in the Chamber and hearing of everything that was
alleged to be going on in the Court; busily occupied with the affairs of
his constituents in Hull, and daily watching, with an increasingly heavy
heart and a bitter humour, the corruption of the times, the declension
of our sea-power, the growing shame of England, and what he believed to
be a dangerous conspiracy afoot for the undoing of the Reformation and
the destruction of the Constitution in both Church and State.

"Garden-poetry" could not be reared on such a soil as this. The age of
Cromwell and Blake was over. The remainder of Marvell's life (save so
far as personal friendship sweetened it) was spent in politics, public
business, in concocting roughly rhymed and bitter satirical poems, and
in the composition of prose pamphlets.

Through it all Marvell remained very much the man of letters, though one
with a great natural aptitude for business. His was always the critical
attitude. He was the friend of Milton and Harrington, of the political
philosophers who invented paper constitutions in the "Rota" Club, and of
the new race of men whose thoughts turned to Natural Science, and who
founded the Royal Society. Office he never thought of. He could have had
it had he chosen, for he was a man of mark, even of distinction, from
the first. Clarendon has told us how members of the House of Commons
"got on" in the Long Parliament of Charles the Second. It was full of
the king's friends, who ran out of the House to tell their shrewd master
the gossip of the lobbies, "commended this man and discommended another
who deserved better, and would many times, when His Majesty spoke well
of any man, ask His Majesty if he would give them leave to let that
person know how gracious His Majesty was to him, or bring him to kiss
his hand. To which he commonly consenting, every one of his servants
delivered some message from him to a Parliament man, and invited him to
Court, as if the King would be willing to see him. And by this means the
rooms at Court were always full of the members of the House of Commons.
This man brought to kiss his hand, and the King induced to confer with
that man and to thank him for his affection, which could never conclude
without some general expression of grace or promise, which the poor
gentleman always interpreted to his own advantage, and expected some
fruit from it that it could never yield."

The suspicious Clarendon, already shaking to his fall, goes on to add,
"all which, being contrary to all former order, did the King no good,
and rendered those unable to do him service who were inclined to
it."[77:1]

It is a lifelike picture Clarendon draws of the crowded rooms, and of
the witty king moving about fooling vanity, ambition, and corruption to
the top of their bent. That the king chose his own ministers is plain
enough.

Marvell was at the beginning well disposed towards Charles. They had
some points in common; and among them a quick sense of humour and a turn
for business. But the member for Hull must soon have recognised that
there was no place for an honest quick-witted man in any Stuart
administration.

Marvell and his great chief remained in their offices until the close of
the year 1659, when the impending Restoration enforced their retirement.
Milton used his leisure to pour forth excited tracts to prove how easy
it would still be to establish a Free Commonwealth. Once again, and for
the last time, he prompted the age to quit its clogs

    "by the known rules of ancient liberty."

These pamphlets of Milton's prove how little that solitary thinker ever
knew of the real mind and temper of the English people.

The Lord Richard Cromwell was exactly the sort of eldest son a great
soldier like Oliver, who had put his foot on fortune's neck, was likely
to have. Richard (1626-1712) was not, indeed, born in the purple, but
his early manhood was nurtured in it. Religion, as represented by long
sermons, tiresome treatises, and prayerful exercises, bored him to
death. Of enthusiasm he had not a trace, nor was he bred to arms. He
delighted in hunting, in the open air, and the company of sportsmen.
Whatever came his way easily, and as a matter of right, he was well
content to take. He bore himself well on State occasions, and could make
a better speech than ever his father was able to do. But he was not a
"restless" Cromwell, and had no faith in his destiny. I do not know
whether he had ever read _Don Quixote_, in Shelton's translation, a very
popular book of the time; probably not, for, though Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, Richard was not a reading man, but if he had, he
must have sympathised with Sancho Panza's attitude of mind towards the
famous island.

   "If your highness has no mind that the government you promised should
   be given me, God made me of less, and perhaps it may be easier for
   Sancho, the Squire, to get to Heaven than for Sancho, the Governor.
   _In the dark all cats are gray._"

The new Protector took up the reins of power with proper forms and
ceremonies, and at once proceeded to summon a Parliament, an Imperial
Cromwellian Parliament, containing representatives both from Scotland
and Ireland. In this Parliament Andrew Marvell sat for the first time as
one of the two members for Kingston-upon-Hull. His election took place
on the 10th of January 1659, being the first county day after the
sheriff had received the writ. Five candidates were nominated: Thomas
Strickland, Andrew Marvell, John Ramsden, Henry Smyth, and Sir Henry
Vane, and a vote being taken in the presence of the mayor, aldermen, and
many of the burgesses, John Ramsden and Andrew Marvell were declared
duly elected.

Nobody to-day, glancing his eye over a list of the knights and
burgesses who made up Richard Cromwell's first and last Parliament,
would ever guess that it represented an order of things of the most
recent date which was just about to disappear. On paper it has a solid
look. The fine old crusted Parliamentary names with which the clerks
were to remain so long familiar as the members trooped out to divide
were more than well represented.[79:1] The Drakes of Amersham were
there; Boscawens, Bullers, and Trelawneys flocked from Cornwall; Sir
Wilfred Lawson sat for Cumberland, and his son for Cockermouth; a
Knightly represented Northamptonshire, whilst Lucys from Charlecote
looked after Warwick, both town and county. Arthur Onslow came from
Surrey, a Townshend from Norfolk, and, of course, a Bankes from Corfe
Castle;[79:2] Oxford University, contented, as she occasionally is, to
be represented by a great man, had chosen Sir Matthew Hale, whilst the
no less useful and laborious Thurloe sat for the sister University.
Anthony Ashley Cooper was there, but in opposition, snuffing the morrow.
Mildmays, Lawleys, Binghams, Herberts, Pelhams, all travelled up to
London with the Lord-Protector's writs in their pockets. A less
revolutionary assembly never met, though there was a regicide or two
among them. But when the members found themselves alone together there
was some loose talk.

On the 27th of January 1659 Marvell attended for the first time in his
place, when the new Protector opened Parliament, and made a speech in
the House of Lords, which was pronounced at the time to be "a very
handsome oration."

The first business of the Commons was to elect a Speaker, nor was their
choice a very lucky one, for it first fell on Chaloner Chute, who
speedily breaking down in health, the Recorder of London was appointed
his substitute, but the Recorder being on his deathbed at the time, and
Chute dying very shortly afterwards, Thomas Bampfield was elected
Speaker, and continued so to be until the Parliament was dissolved by
proclamation on the 22nd of April. This proclamation was Richard
Cromwell's last act of State.

Marvell's first Parliament was both short and inglorious. One only of
its resolutions is worth quoting:--

   "That a very considerable navy be forthwith provided, and put to sea
   for the safety of the Commonwealth and the preservation of the trade
   and commerce thereof."

It was, however, the army and not the navy that had to be reckoned
with--an army unpaid, angry, suspicious, and happily divided. I must not
trace the history of faction. There is no less exalted page in English
history since the days of Stephen. Monk is its fitting hero, and Charles
the Second its expensive saviour of society. The story how the
Restoration was engineered by General Monk, who, if vulgar, was adroit,
both on land and sea, is best told from Monk's point of view in the
concluding chapter of _Baker's Chronicle_ (Sir Roger de Coverley's
favourite Sunday reading), whilst that old-fashioned remnant, who still
love to read history for fun, may not object to be told that they will
find printed in the Report of the Leyborne-Popham Papers (_Historical
Manuscripts Commission_, 1899, p. 204) a _Narrative of the Restoration_,
by Mr. John Collins, the Chief Butler of the Inner Temple, proving in
great and highly diverting detail how this remarkable event was really
the work not so much of Monk as of the Chief Butler.

Richard Cromwell having slipped the collar, the officers assumed
command, as they were only too ready to do, and recalled the old,
dishonoured, but pertinacious Rump Parliament, which, though mustering
at first but forty-two members, at once began to talk and keep journals
as if nothing had happened since the day ten years before, when it was
sent about its business. Old Speaker Lenthall was routed out of
obscurity, and much against his will, and despite his protests, clapped
once more into the chair. Dr. John Owen, an old parliamentary preaching
hand, was once again requisitioned to preach before the House, which he
did at enormous length one fine Sunday in May.

The Rump did not prove a popular favourite. It was worse than Old Noll
himself, who could at least thrash both Dutchman and Spaniard, and be
even more feared abroad than he was hated at home. The City of London,
then almost an Estate of the Realm, declared for a Free Parliament, and
it soon became apparent to every one that the whole country was eager to
return as soon as possible to the old mould. Nothing now stood between
Charles and his own but half a dozen fierce old soldiers and their
dubious, discontented, unpaid men.

It was once commonly supposed (it is so no longer), that the Restoration
party was exclusively composed of dispossessed Cavaliers, bishops in
hiding, ejected parsons, high-flying _jure divino_ Episcopalians,
talkative toss-pots, and the great pleasure-loving crowd, cruelly
repressed under the rule of the saints. Had it been left to these
ragged regiments, the issue would have been doubtful, and the result
very different. The Presbyterian ministers who occupied the rectories
and vicarages of the Church of England and their well-to-do flocks in
both town and country were, with but few exceptions, all for King
Charles and a restored monarchy. In this the ministers may have shown a
sound political instinct, for none of them had any more mind than the
Anglican bishops to tolerate Papists, Socinians, Quakers, and Fifth
Monarchy men, but in their management of the business of the Restoration
these divines exposed themselves to the same condemnation that Clarendon
in an often-quoted passage passed upon his own clerical allies. When
read by the light of the Act of "Uniformity," the "Corporation," the
"Five Mile," and the "Conventicle" Acts, the conduct of the
Presbyterians seems recklessness itself, whilst the ignorance their
ministers displayed of the temper of the people they had lived amongst
all their lives, and whom they adjured to cry _God save the King_, but
not to drink his Majesty's health (because health-drinking was forbidden
in the Old Testament), would be startling were it not so eminently
characteristic.[82:1]

The Rump, amidst the ridicule and contempt of the populace, was again
expelled by military force on the 13th of October 1659. The officers
were divided in opinion, some supporting, others, headed by Lambert,
opposing the Parliament; but _vis major_, or superior cunning, was on
the side of Lambert, who placed his soldiers in the streets leading to
Westminster Hall, and when the Speaker came in his coach, his horses
were turned, and he was conducted very civilly home. The regiments that
should have resisted, "observing that they were exposed to derision,"
peaceably returned to their quarters.

Monk, in the meanwhile, was advancing with his army from Edinburgh, and
affected not to approve of the force put upon Parliament. The feeling
for a Free Parliament increased in strength and violence every day. The
Rump was for a third time restored in December by the section of the
London army that supported its claim. Lenthall was once more in the
chair, and the journals were resumed without the least notice of past
occurrences. Monk, having reached London amidst great excitement, went
down to the House and delivered an ambiguous speech. Up to the last Monk
seems to have remained uncertain what to do. The temper of the City,
which was fiercely anti-Rump, may have decided him. At all events he
invited the secluded, that is the expelled, members of the old Long
Parliament to take their seats along with the others, and in a formal
declaration addressed to Parliament, dated the 21st of February 1660, he
counselled it among other things to dissolve legally "in order to make
way for a succession of Parliaments." In a word, Monk declared for a
Free Parliament. Great indeed were the national rejoicings.

On the 16th of March 1660 a Bill was read a third time dissolving the
Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, 3rd November 1640, and for
the calling and holding of a Parliament at Westminster on the 25th of
April 1660. This time an end was really made of the Rump, though for
many a long day there were parliamentary pedants to be found in the land
ready to maintain that the Long Parliament had never been legally
dissolved and still _de jure_ existed; so long, I presume, as any
single member of it remained alive.

Marvell was not a "Rumper," but on the 2nd of April 1660 he was again
elected for Hull to sit in what is usually called the Convention
Parliament. John Ramsden was returned at the head of the poll with 227
votes, Marvell receiving 141. There were four defeated candidates.

With this Convention Parliament begins Marvell's remarkable
correspondence, on fine folio sheets of paper, with the corporation of
Hull, whose faithful servant he remained until death parted them in
1678.

This correspondence, which if we include in it, as we well may, the
letters to the Worshipful Society of Masters and Pilots of the Trinity
House in Hull, numbers upwards of 350 letters, and with but one
considerable gap (from July 1663 to October 1665) covers the whole
period of Marvell's membership, is, I believe, unique in our public
records. The letters are preserved at Hull, where I hope care is taken
to preserve them from the autograph hunter and the autograph thief.
Captain Thompson printed a great part of this correspondence in 1776,
and Mr. Grosart gave the world the whole of it in the second volume of
his edition of Marvell's complete works.

An admission may as well be made at once. This correspondence is not so
interesting as it might have been expected to prove. Marvell did not
write letters for his biographer, nor to instruct posterity, nor to
serve any party purpose, nor even to exhibit honest emotion, but simply
to tell his employers, whose wages he took, what was happening at
Westminster. He kept his reflections either to himself or for his
political broadsheets, and indeed they were seldom of the kind it would
have been safe to entrust to the post.

Good Mr. Grosart fusses and frets terribly over Marvell's astonishing
capacity for chronicling in sombre silence every kind of legislative
abomination. It is at times a little hard to understand it, for Hull was
what may be called a Puritan place. No doubt caution dictated some of
the reticence--but the reserve of Marvell's character is one of the few
traits of his personality that has survived. He was a satirist, not an
enthusiast.

I will give the first letter _in extenso_ to serve as a specimen, and a
very favourable one, of the whole correspondence:--

                                                     "_Nov. 17, 1660._

   "GENTLEMEN, MY WORTHY FRIENDS,--Although during the necessary absence
   of my partner, Mr. Ramsden, I write with but halfe a penn, and can
   scarce perswade myselfe to send you so imperfect an account of your
   own and the publick affairs, as I needs must for want of his
   assistance; yet I had rather expose mine own defects to your good
   interpretation, then excuse thereby a totall neglect of my duty, and
   that trust which is divided upon me. At my late absence out of Town I
   had taken such order that if you had commanded me any thing, I might
   soon haue received it, and so returned on purpose to this place to
   haue obeyed you. But hearing nothing of that nature howeuer, I was
   present the first day of the Parliament's sitting, and tooke care to
   write to Mr. Maior what work we had cut out. Since when, we have had
   little new, but onely been making a progresse in those things I then
   mentioned. There is yet brought in an Act in which of all others your
   corporation is the least concerned: that is, where wives shall refuse
   to cohabit with their husbands, that in such case the husband shall
   not be liable to pay any debts which she may run into, for clothing,
   diet, lodging, or other expenses. I wish with all my heart you were no
   more touched in a vote that we haue made for bringing in an Act of a
   new Assessment for six moneths, of 70,000li. _per mensem_, to begin
   next January. The truth is, the delay ere monyes can be got in, eats
   up a great part of all that is levying, and that growing charge of the
   Army and Navy doubles upon us. And that is all that can be said for
   excuse of ourselues to the Country, to whom we had giuen our own hopes
   of no further sessment to be raised, but must now needs incurre the
   censure of improvidence before or prodigality now, though it becomes
   no private member, the resolution having passed the House, to
   interpose further his own judgment in a thing that can not be
   remedied; and it will be each man's ingenuity not to grudge an
   after-payment for that settlement and freedome from Armyes and Navyes,
   which before he would haue been glad to purchase with his whole
   fortune. There remain some eight Regiments to be disbanded, but those
   all horse in a manner, and some seauenteen shipps to be payd of, that
   haue laid so long upon charge in the harbour, beside fourscore shipps
   which are reckoned to us for this Winter guard. But after that, all
   things are to go upon his Majestye's own purse out of the Tunnage and
   Poundage and his other revenues. But there being so great a provision
   made for mony, I doubt not but ere we rise, to see the whole army
   disbanded, and according to the Act, hope to see your Town once more
   ungarrisond, in which I should be glad and happy to be instrumentall
   to the uttermost. For I can not but remember, though then a child,
   those blessed days when the youth of your own town were trained for
   your militia, and did, methought, become their arms much better than
   any soldiers that I haue seen there since. And it will not be amisse
   if you please (now that we are about a new Act of regulating the
   Militia, that it may be as a standing strength, but not as ill as a
   perpetuall Army to the Nation) to signify to me any thing in that
   matter that were according to your ancient custome and desirable for
   you. For though I can promise little, yet I intend all things for your
   service. The Act for review of the Poll bill proceeds, and that for
   making this Declaration of his Majesty a Law in religious matters.
   Order likewise is giuen for drawing up all the votes made during our
   last sitting, in the businesse of Sales of Bishops' and Deans' and
   Chapters' lands into an Act, which I should be glad to see passed. The
   purchasers the other day offerd the house 600,000li. in ready mony,
   and to make the Bishops', etc., revenue as good or better then before.
   But the House thought it not fit or seasonable to hearken to it. We
   are so much the more concernd to see that great interest of the
   purchasers satisfyed and quieted, at least in that way which our own
   votes haue propounded. On Munday next we are to return to the
   consideration of apportioning 100,000li. per annum upon all the lands
   in the nation, in lieu of the Court of Wards. The debate among the
   Countyes, each thinking it self overrated, makes the successe of that
   businesse something casuall, and truly I shall not assist it much for
   my part, for it is little reason that your Town should contribute in
   that charge. The Excise bill for longer continuance (I wish it proue
   not too long) will come in also next weeke. And I foresee we shall be
   called upon shortly to effect our vote made the former sitting, of
   raising his Majestie's revenue to 1,200,000li. per Annum. I do not
   love to write so much of this mony news. But I think you haue observed
   that Parliaments have been always made use of to that purpose, and
   though we may buy gold too deare, yet we must at any rate be glad of
   Peace, Freedom, and a good Conscience. Mr. Maior tells me, your
   duplicates of the Poll are coming up. I shall go with them to the
   Exchequer and make your excuse, if any be requisite. My long silence
   hath made me now trespasse on the other hand in a long letter, but I
   doubt not of your good construction of so much familiarity and trouble
   from, Gentlemen, your most affectionate friend and servant,

                                                       "ANDR: MARVELL.

   "WESTMINSTER, _Nov. 17, 1660._"

Although this first letter of the Hull correspondence is dated the 17th
of November 1660, the Convention Parliament began its sittings on the
25th of April.

In composition this Convention Parliament was very like Richard
Cromwell's, and indeed it contained many of the same members, whose
loyalty, however, was less restrained than in 1659. All the world knew
what brought this Parliament together. It was to make the nation's
peace with its king, either on terms or without terms. "We are all
Royalists now" are words which must often have been on the lips of the
members of this House. One can imagine the smiles, half grim, half
ironical, that would accompany their utterance. Such a right-about-face
could never be dignified. It is impossible not to be reminded of
schoolboys at the inevitable end of "a barring out." The sarcastic
comment of Clarendon has not lost its sting. "From this time there was
such an emulation and impatience in Lords, Commons, and City, and
generally over the Kingdom, who should make the most lively expressions
of their duty and of their joy, that a man could not but wonder where
those people dwelt who had done all the mischief and kept the King so
many years from enjoying the comfort and support of such excellent
subjects."[88:1]

The most significant sentence in Marvell's first letter to his
constituents is that in which he refers to the Bill for making Charles's
declaration in religious matters the law of the land. Had the passing of
any such Bill been possible, how different the history of England would
have been!

The declaration Marvell is referring to was contained in the famous
message from Breda, which was addressed by Charles to all his loving
subjects of what degree or quality, and was expressed as follows:--

   "And because the passion and uncharitableness of the times have
   produced several opinions in Religion by which men are engaged in
   parties and animosities against each other (which, when they shall
   hereafter unite in a freedom of conversation, will be composed or
   better understood) we do declare a liberty to tender Consciences, and
   that no man shall be disquieted or called in question for differences
   of opinion in matters of Religion which do not disturb the peace of
   the Kingdom; and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
   Parliament as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to us for the
   full granting of that indulgence."

It is only doing the king bare justice to say that he was always ready
and willing to keep this part of his royal word--but it proved an
impossibility.

A Roman Catholic as a matter of creed, a Hobbist in conversation, a
sensualist in practice, and the shrewdest though most indolent of cynics
in council, Charles, in this matter of religious toleration, would
gladly have kept his word, not indeed because it was his word, for on
the point of honour he was indifferent, but because it jumped with his
humour, and would have mitigated the hard lot of the Catholics. Charles
was not a theorist, all his tastes being eminently practical, not to say
scientific. He was not a tyrant, but a _de facto_ man from head to heel.
For the _jure divino_ of the English Episcopate he cared as little as
Oliver had ever done for the _jure divino_ of the English Crown. Oliver
once said, and he was not given to _braggadocio_, that he would fire his
pistol at the king "as soon as at another if he met him in battle," and
the second Charles would have thought no more of beheading an Anglican
bishop than he did of sending Sir Harry Vane to the scaffold. Honesty
and virtue, on the rare occasions Charles encountered them, he admired
much as a painter admires the colours of a fine sunset. Above everything
else Charles was determined never again, if he could help it, to be sent
on his travels, to be snubbed and starved in foreign courts.

Sir Thomas Urquhart of Cromartie, the first and best translator of
Rabelais, is said to have died of laughing on hearing of the
Restoration; Charles did not die, but he must have laughed inwardly at
the spectacle that met his eyes everywhere as he made his
often-described progress from Dover to London, and examined the gorgeous
beds and quilts, fine linen and carpets, couches, horses and liveries,
his faithful Commons had been at the pains and at the expense of
providing for his comfort.

A few years afterwards Marvell wrote the following lines:--

    "Of a tall stature and of sable hue,
    Much like the son of Kish, that lofty Jew;
    Twelve years complete he suffered in exile
    And kept his father's asses all the while.
    At length, by wonderful impulse of fate,
    The people called him home to help the state,
    And what is more they sent him money too
    To clothe him all from head to foot anew;
    Nor did he such small favours then disdain,
    Who in his thirtieth year began his reign."[90:1]

The "small favours" grew in size year by year.

Why it was impossible for Charles to keep his word may be read in
Clarendon's _Life_, and in the history of the Savoy Conference, and need
not be restated here. In the opinion of the Anglican clergy, the king's
divine right stood no higher than their own. They too had suffered in
exile. They had been "robbed" of their tithes, and turned out of their
palaces, rectories and vicarages, and excluded from the churches they
still called "theirs." Their Book of Common Prayer was no longer in
common use, having been banished by the "Directory of Public Worship"
since 1645. So late as July 1, 1660, Pepys records attending a service
in the Abbey, and adds "No Common Prayer yet." If we find ourselves
wondering why the Anglican party should have been so powerful in 1660,
our wonder ought not to be greater than is excited by the power of the
Puritan party when Laud was put to death. Both parties were, on each
occasion, in a minority. Though England has never been long
priest-ridden, it has often been priest-led.

The Convention Parliament did all that was expected of it. It was,
however irregularly summoned, a truly representative assembly. Its
members all swore--what will not members of Parliament swear?--that the
king was supreme in Church and State, the only rightful king of the
realm and of all other his dominions, and that from their hearts they
abhorred, detested, and abjured the damnable doctrine that princes,
excommunicated or deprived of the Pope, might be murdered by their
subjects. They proceeded to pass a very useful Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, agreeing to let bygones be bygones, except in certain named
cases. They ordered Mr. John Milton to be taken into custody, and
prosecuted (which he never was) by the Attorney-General. Later on the
poet was released from custody, and we find Mr. Marvell complaining to
the House that their sergeant had extracted £150 in fees before he would
let Mr. Milton go. On which Sir Heneage Finch, afterwards Lord
Chancellor, laconically observed that Milton deserved hanging. He
certainly got off easily, but, as he lived to publish _Paradise Lost_,
_Paradise Regained_, and _Samson Agonistes_, he may be said to have
earned his freedom. All his poetry put together never brought him in a
third of the sum the sergeant got for letting him out of prison. General
Monk, the man-midwife, who so skilfully assisted at that great Birth of
Time, the Restoration, was made a duke, and Cromwell's army, so long the
force behind the supreme power, was paid its arrears and (two regiments
excepted) disbanded. "Fifty thousand men," says Macaulay, "accustomed to
the profession of arms, were thrown upon the world ... in a few months
there remained not a trace indicating that the most formidable army in
the world had just been absorbed in the mass of the community."[92:1]

After this the House of Commons fell to discussing religion, and made
the sad discovery that differences of opinion still existed. In these
circumstances they decided to refer the matter to their pious king, and
to such divines as he might choose. They then voted large sums of money
for the royal establishment, and, it being the very end of August,
adjourned till the 6th of November. As for making constitutional terms
with the king, they never attempted it, though Sir Matthew Hale is
credited with an attempt to induce them to do so. Any proposals of the
kind must have failed. The people were in no mood for making
constitutions.

Having met again on the 6th of November, Marvell, in a letter to the
Mayor and Aldermen of Hull, dated the 27th of the month, reports that
"the House fell upon the making out of the King's revenue to £1,200,000
a year." "The Customs are estimated toward £500,000 per annum in the
revenue. His lands and fee farms £250,000. The Excise of Beer and Ale
£300,000, the rest arise out of the Post Office, Wine Licenses,
Stannaries Court, Probate of Wills, Post-fines, Forests, and other
rights of the Crown. The excise of Foreign Commodities is to be
continued apart until satisfaction of public debts and engagements
secured upon the excise."

This settlement of revenue marks "the beginning of a time." Cromwell, as
Cowley puts it in his _Discourse_, by far the ablest indictment of
Oliver ever penned, "took armes against two hundred thousand pounds a
year, and raised them himself to above two millions." It is true.
Cromwell spent the money honestly and efficiently, and chiefly on a navy
that enabled him to wrest the command of the sea from the Dutch, to
secure the carrying trade, and to challenge the world for supremacy in
the Indies, both East and West. In doing this, he had the instinct of
the whole nation behind him. But it was expensive.

Had Charles been the most honest and thrifty of men, instead of one of
the most dishonest and extravagant, he must have found his financial
position a very difficult one. He was poorer than Cromwell. The feudal
taxation had fallen into desuetude. To revive wardships, etc., was
impossible, to recover arrears hopeless. There was nothing for it but
scientific taxation. One of his first Acts contains a schedule of taxed
articles extending over fifteen double-columned pages of a quarto
volume. To raise this revenue was difficult--in fact impossible, and the
amount actually obtained was always far below the estimates.

Marvell's letter concludes thus:--

   "To-morrow is the Bill for enacting his Majesty's declaration in
   religious matters and to have its first reading. It is said that on
   Sunday next Doctor Reynolds shall be created Bishop of Norwich."

The rumour about Reynolds's bishopric proved to be true. The new bishop
was a very "moderate" Anglican indeed, and his appointment was meant as
a sop to the Presbyterians. Richard Baxter and Edmund Calamy refused
similar preferment.

On the 29th of November Marvell's letter contains the following
passage:--

   "Yesterday the Bill of the King's Declaration in religious matters
   was read for the first time; but upon the question for a second
   reading 'twas carried 183 against 157 in the negative, so there is an
   end of that Bill and for those excellent things therein. We must
   henceforth rely only upon his Majesty's goodness, who, I must needs
   say, hath hitherto been more ready to give than we to receive."

It is a noticeable feature of this correspondence that Marvell seldom
mentions which way he voted himself.

The letter of the 4th of December contains some interesting matter:--

   "GENTLEMEN,--Since my last, upon Thursday, the Bill for Vicarages
   hath been carryed up to the Lords; and a Message to them from our
   House that they would expedite the Bill for confirmation of Magna
   Charta, that for confirmation of marriages, and other bills of
   publick concernment, which haue laid by them euer since our last
   sitting, not returned to us. We had then the Bill for six moneths
   assesment in consideration, and read the Bill for taking away Court
   of Wards and Purveyance, and establishing the moiety of the Excise
   of Beere and ale in perpetuum, about which we sit euery afternoon in
   a Grand Committee. Upon Sunday last were consecrated in the Abby at
   Westminster, Doctor Cossins, Bishop of Durham, Sterne of Carlile,
   Gauden of Exeter, Ironside of Bristow, Loyd of Landaffe, Lucy of St.
   Dauids, Lany, the seuenth, whose diocese I remember not at present,
   and to-day they keep their feast in Haberdasher's hall, in London.
   Dr. Reinolds was not of the number, who is intended for Norwich. A
   Congedelire is gone down to Hereford for Dr. Monk, the Generall's
   brother, at present Provost of Eaton. 'Tis thought that since our
   throwing out the Bill of the King's Declaration, Mr. Calamy, and
   other moderate men, will be resolute in refusing of Bishopricks....
   To-day our House was upon the Bill of Attainder of those that haue
   been executed, those that are fled, and of Cromwell, Bradshaw,
   Ireton, and Pride, and 'tis ordered that the carkasses and coffins
   of the four last named, shall be drawn with what expedition
   possible, upon an hurdle to Tyburn, there (to) be hanged up for a
   while, and then buryed under the gallows....

   "WESTMINSTER, _Dec. 4, 1660_."

Marvell's cool reporting of the hideous indignity inflicted upon his old
master, and allowing it to pass _sub silentio_, is one of the many
occasions that stirred Mr. Grosart's wonder. Nerves were tough in those
days. Pepys tells us unconcernedly enough how, after seeing Lord
Southampton sworn in at the Court of Exchequer as Lord Treasurer, he
noticed "the heads of Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Ireton set up at the
further end of Westminster Hall." It is quite possible Lady Fauconberg
may have seen the same sight.[95:1]

The Convention Parliament was dissolved on the 29th of December 1660.

On 1st April 1661 Marvell was returned for the third and last time for
Hull, for Charles the Second's first Parliament was of unconscionable
long duration, not being dissolved till January 1679, after Marvell's
death. It is known in history as the Pensionary or Long Parliament. The
election figures were as below:--

        Colonel Gilbey,       294
        Mr. Andrew Marvell,   240
        Mr. Edward Barnard,   195
        Mr. John Ramsden,     122

Marvell was not present at or before the election, for on the 6th of
April he writes:--

   "I perceive by Mr. Mayor that you have again (as if it were grown a
   thing of course) made choice of me now, the third time, to serve for
   you in Parliament, which as I cannot attribute to anything but your
   constancy, so shall I, God willing, as in gratitude obliged, with no
   less constancy and vigour continue to execute your commands and study
   your service."

A word may here be said about payment of borough members. The members'
fee was 6s. 8d. for every day the Parliament lasted. The wages were paid
by the corporation out of the borough funds. It was never a popular
charge. Burgesses in many places cared as little for M.P.'s as do some
of their successors for free libraries. Prynne, perhaps the greatest
parliamentary lawyer that ever lived, told Pepys one day, as they were
driving to the Temple, that the number of burgesses to be returned to
Parliament for any particular borough was not, for aught Prynne could
find, fixed by law, but was at first left to the discretion of the
sheriff, and that several boroughs had complained of the sheriff's
putting them to the charge of sending up burgesses.

In August 1661 the corporation paid Marvell £28 for his fee as one of
their burgesses, being 6s. 8d. a day for eighty-four days, the length of
the Convention Parliament. Marvell continued to take his wages until the
end of his days; but it is perhaps a mistake to suppose he was the very
last member to do so. It was, however, unusual in Marvell's time.[96:1]

This Pensionary Parliament, though of a very decided "Church and King"
complexion, was not in its original composition a body lacking character
or independence, but it steadily deteriorated in both respects.
Vacancies, as they occurred, and they occurred very frequently in those
days of short lives, were filled up by courtiers and pensioners.

In the small tract, entitled _Flagellum Parliamentum_, which is a highly
libellous "Dod," often attributed to Marvell, a record is preserved of
more than two hundred members of this Parliament in 1675. Despite some
humorous touches, this _Flagellum Parliamentum_ is still disagreeable to
read. But the most graphic picture we have of this Parliament is to be
found in one of Lord Shaftesbury's political tracts entitled "A letter
from a Parliament man to his Friend" (1675):--

   "SIR,--I see you are greatly scandalized at our slow and confused
   Proceedings. I confess you have cause enough; but were you but
   within these walls for one half day, and saw the strange make and
   complexion that this house is of, you would wonder as much that ever
   you wondered at it; for we are such a pied Parliament, that none can
   say of what colour we are; for we consist of Old Cavaliers, Old
   Round-Heads, Indigent-Courtiers, and true Country Gentlemen: the two
   latter are most numerous, and would in probability bring things to
   some issue were they not clogged with the numerous uncertainties of
   the former. For the Old Cavalier, grown aged, and almost past his
   vice, is damnable godly and makes his doting piety more a plague to
   the world than his debauchery was, for he is so much a by-got to the
   B(ishop) that he forces his Loyalty to strike sail to his Religion,
   and could be content to pare the nails a little of the Civil
   Government, so you would but let him sharpen the Ecclesiastical
   Talons: which behaviour of his so exasperates the Round-Head, that
   he on the other hand cares not what increases the Interest of the
   Crown receives, so he can but diminish that of the miter: so that
   the Round-Head had rather enslave the Man than the Conscience: the
   Cavalier rather the Conscience than the Man; there being a
   sufficient stock of animosity as proper matter to work upon. Upon
   these, therefore, the Courtier mutually plays, for if any Ante-court
   motion be made he gains the Round-Head either to oppose or absent by
   telling them, If they will join him now he will join them for
   Liberty of Conscience. And when any affair is started on behalf of
   the Country he assures the Cavaliers, If they will then stand by him
   he will then join with them in promoting a Bill against the
   fanatics. Thus play they on both hands.... Wherefore it were happy
   that he had neither Round-Head nor Cavalier in the House, for they
   are each of them so prejudicate against the other that their sitting
   here signifies nothing but their fostering their old venom and lying
   at catch to stop every advantage to bear down each other, though it
   be in the destruction of their country. For if the Round-Heads bring
   in a good bill the Old Cavalier opposes it, for no other reason but
   because they brought it in."[98:1]

Such was the theatre of Marvell's public actions for the rest of his
days, and if at times he may need forgiveness for the savagery of his
satire, it ought to be found easy to forgive him.

The two members for Hull were soon immersed in matters of much local
importance. They began by quarrelling with one another, Marvell writing
"the bond of civility betwixt Col. Gilby and myself being unhappily
snappt in pieces, and in such manner that I cannot see how it is
possible ever to knit them again." House of Commons quarrels are usually
soon made up, and so was this one. The custom was for _both_ members to
sign these letters, though they are all written in Marvell's hand--but
if this was for any reason inconvenient, Marvell signed alone. No
letters, unless in Marvell's writing, are preserved at Hull, which is a
curious fact.

One of these bits of local business related to a patent alleged to have
been granted by the Crown to certain persons, authorising them to erect
and maintain _ballast wharfs_ in the various ports, and to make charges
in respect of them. This was resented by the members for the ports, and
on Marvell's motion the matter was referred to the Committee of
Grievances, before whom the patentees were summoned. When they came it
appeared that the patent warranted none of the exactions that had been
demanded, and also that the warrant sent down to Hull naming these
charges was nothing more than a draft framed by the patentees
themselves, and not authorised in any way. The patent was at once
suspended. Marvell, like a true member of Parliament, wishes to get any
little local credit that may be due for such prompt action, and
writes:--

   "In this thing (although I count all things I can do for your service
   to be mere trifles, and not worth taking notice of in respect of what
   I owe you) I must do myself that right to let you know that I, and I
   alone, have had the happiness to do that little which hitherto is
   effected."

The matter required delicate handling, for a reason Marvell gives:
"Because, if the King's right in placing such impositions should be
weakened, neither should he have power to make a grant of them to you."

Another much longer business related to a lighthouse, which some
outsiders were anxious to build in the Humber. The corporation of Hull,
acting on Marvell's advice, had petitioned the Privy Council, and were
asked by their business-like member "to send us up a dormant credit for
an hundred pound, which we yet indeed have no use of, but if need be
must have ready at hand to reward such as will not otherwise befriend
your business." Some months later Marvell forwards an account, not of
the £100, but of the legal expenses about the lighthouse. He wishes it
were less, but hopes that the "vigorous resistance" will discourage the
designers from proceeding farther. This it did not do. As a member of
the bar, I find two or three of the items in this old-world Bill of
Costs interesting:--

   To Mr. Scroggs to attend the Council,        £3  6  0
    "  "    "  again for the same,               3  6  0
   Spent on Mr. Scroggs at dinner,                 18  0
   To Mr. Scroggs again,                         3  0  0
   Fees of the Council Table,                    1 10  0
   Fee to Clerk of the Council,                  2  0  0
   For dinner for Mr. Scroggs and wine after,    1  0  0
   To Mr. Cresset (the Solicitor),              20  0  0
   To Mr. Scroggs for a dinner,                  1  0  0

The barrister who was so frequently "refreshed" by Marvell lived to
become "the infamous Lord Chief Justice Scroggs" of all school
histories.

A week before the prorogation of Parliament, which happened on the 19th
of May 1662, Marvell went to Holland and remained there for nine months,
for he did not return until the very end of March 1663, more than a
month after the reassembling of the House.

What took him there nobody knows. Writing to the Trinity House about the
lighthouse business on the 8th of May 1662, Marvell says:--

   "But that which troubles me is that by the interest of some persons
   too potent for me to refuse, and who have a great direction and
   influence upon my counsels and fortune, I am obliged to go beyond
   sea before I have perfected it (_i.e._ the lighthouse business). But
   first I do thereby make my Lord Carlisle (who is a member of the
   Privy Council and one of them to whom your business is referred)
   absolutely yours. And my journey is but into Holland, from whence I
   shall weekly correspond as if I were at London with all the rest of
   my friends, towards the affecting your business. Then I leave Col.
   Gilbey there, whose ability for business and affection to yours is
   such that I cannot be wanted though I am missing."

It is plain from this that Lord Carlisle is one of the powerful persons
referred to--but beyond this we cannot go.

Whilst in Holland Marvell wrote both to the Trinity House and to the
corporation on business matters.

In March 1663 Marvell came back in a hurry, some complaints having been
made in Hull about his absence. He begins his first letter after his
return as follows:--

   "Being newly arrived in town and full of business, yet I could not
   neglect to give you notice that this day (2nd April 1663) I have been
   in the House and found my place empty, though it seems, as I now
   hear, that some persons would have been so courteous as to have
   filled it for me."

In none of these letters is any reference made to the debates in the
House on the unhappy Bill of Uniformity, nor does any record of those
discussions anywhere exist. The Savoy Conference proved a failure, and
no lay reader of Baxter's account of it can profess wonder. Not a single
point in difference was settled. In the meantime the restored Houses of
Convocation, from which the Presbyterian members were excluded, had
completed their revision of the Book of Common Prayer and presented it
to Parliament.

In considering the Bill for Uniformity, the House of Lords, where
Presbyterianism was powerfully represented, showed more regard for those
"tender consciences" to which the king (by the new Prayer Book called
for the first time "our most religious King") had referred in his Breda
Declaration than did the House of Commons. "The Book, the whole Book,
and nothing but the Book" was, in effect, the cry of the lower House,
and on the 19th of May, ten days after Marvell had left for the
Continent, the Act of Uniformity became law, and by the 24th of August
1662 all beneficed ministers and schoolmasters had to make the
celebrated subscription and profession, or go out into the wilderness.

There has always been a dispute as to the physical possibility of
perusing the compilation in question before the day fixed by the
Statute. The Book was advertised for sale in London on the 6th of
August, but how many copies were actually available on that day is not
known.

The Dean and Chapter of Peterborough did not get their copies until the
17th of August. When the new folios reached the lonely parsonages of
Cumberland and Durham--who would care to say? The Act required a verbal
avowal of "unfeigned assent and consent to all and everything contained
and prescribed in and by the Book of Common Prayer, and administrations
of the Sacraments and other rites and ceremonies of the Church according
to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter, and the
form of manner of making, ordaining, and consecrating Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons" to be made after the service upon "some Lord's day" before
the Feast of St. Bartholomew, _i.e._ the 24th of August 1662. The Act
also required subscription within the same time-limit to a declaration
of (_inter alia_) uniformity to the Liturgy of the Church of England "as
it is now by law established."

That this haste was indecent no layman is likely to dispute, but that it
wrought practical wrong is doubtful. The Vicar of Bray needed no time to
read his new Folio to enable him to make whatever avowal concerning it
the law demanded; and as for signing the declaration, all he required
for that purpose was pen and ink. Neither had the incumbent, who was a
good churchman at heart, any doubts to settle. He rejoiced to know that
his side was once more uppermost, and that it would be no longer
necessary for him, in order to retain his living, to pretend to tolerate
a Presbyterian, or to submit to read in his church the Directory of
Public Worship. Convocation had approved the new Prayer Book, which was
in substance the old one, and what more did any churchman require? As
for the Presbyterians and others who were in possession of livings, the
failure of the Savoy Conference must have made it plain to them that the
Church of England had not allowed the king to keep his word, that
compromise and comprehension had failed, and that if they were to remain
where they were, it could only be on terms of completely severing
themselves from all other Protestant bodies in the world, and becoming
thorough Episcopalians. No Presbyterian of any eminence was prepared to
make the statutory avowal. Painful as it always must be to give up any
good thing by a fixed date, it is hard to see what advantage would have
accrued from delay.

When the day came, some two thousand parsons were turned out of the
Church of England. Among them were included many of the most devout and
some of the most learned of our divines. Their "coming in" had been
irregular, their "going out" was painful.

Save so far as it turned these men out, the Act was a failure. It did
not procure that uniformity in the public worship of God which it
declared was so desirable; it prevented no scandal; it arrested no
decay; it allayed no distemper, and it certainly did not settle the
peace of the Church. Inside the Church the bishops were supine, the
parochial clergy indifferent, and the worshippers, if such a name can
properly be bestowed upon the congregations, were grossly irreverent.
Nor was any improvement in the conduct of the Church service noticeable
until after the Revolution, and when legislation had conceded a somewhat
shabby measure of toleration to those who by that time had become rigid,
traditional, and hereditary dissenters. Then indeed some attempts began
to be made to secure a real uniformity of ritual in the public worship
of the Church of England.[104:1] How far success has rewarded these
exertions it is not for me to say.

Marvell did not remain long at home after his return from Holland. A
strange adventure lay before him. He thus introduces it in a letter
dated 20th June 1663:--

   "GENTLEMEN, MY VERY WORTHY FRIENDS,--The relation I have to your
   affairs, and the intimacy of that affection I ow you, do both
   incline and oblige me to communicate to you, that there is a
   probability I may very shortly have occasion to go beyond sea; for
   my Lord of Carlisle being chosen by his Majesty, Embassadour
   Extraordinary to Muscovy, Sweden, and Denmarke, hath used his power,
   which ought to be very great with me, to make me goe along with him
   Secretary in those embassages. It is no new thing for Members of our
   House to be dispens'd with for the service of the King and Nation in
   forain parts. And you may be sure that I will not stirre without
   speciall leave of the House; that so you may be freed from any
   possibility of being importuned or tempted to make any other choice,
   in my absence. However, I can not but advise also with you, desiring
   to take your assent along with me, so much esteeme I have both of
   your prudence and friendship. The time allotted for the embassy is
   not much above a yeare: probably it may not be much less betwixt our
   adjournment and next meeting; and, however, you have Colonell Gilby,
   to whom my presence can make litle addition, so that if I cannot
   decline this voyage, I shall have the comfort to believe, that, all
   things considered, you cannot thereby receive any disservice. I
   shall hope to receive herein your speedy answer...."

What was the "power" Lord Carlisle had over Marvell is not now
discoverable, but the tie, whatever it may have been, was evidently a
close one.

A month after this letter Marvell started on his way.

   "GENTLEMEN, MY VERY WORTHY FRIENDS,--Being this day taking barge for
   Gravesend, there to embark for Archangel, so to Muscow, thence for
   Sweden, and last of all Denmarke; all of which I hope, by God's
   blessing, to finish within twelve moneths time: I do hereby, with my
   last and seriousest thoughts, salute you, rendring you all hearty
   thanks for your great kindnesse and friendship to me upon all
   occasions, and ardently beseeching God to keep you all in His
   gracious protection, to your own honour, and the welfare and
   flourishing of your Corporation, to which I am and shall ever
   continue a most affectionate and devoted servant. I undertake this
   voyage with the order and good liking of his Majesty, and by leave
   given me from the House and enterd in the Journal; and having
   received moreover your approbation, I go therefore with more ease
   and satisfaction of mind, and augurate to myselfe the happier
   successe in all my proceedings...."

It was Marvell's good fortune to be in Lord Carlisle's frigate which
made the voyage to Archangel in less than a month, sailing from
Gravesend on the 22nd of July and arriving at the bar of Archangel on
the 19th of August. The companion frigate took seven weeks to compass
the same distance.

Nothing of any importance attaches to this Russian embassy. It cost a
great deal of money, took up a great deal of time, exposed the
ambassador and his suite to much rudeness and discomfort, and failed to
effect its main object, which was to secure a renewal of the privileges
formerly enjoyed in Muscovy by British merchants.

One of the attendants upon the ambassador made a small book out of his
travels, which did not get printed till 1669, when it attracted little
notice. Mr. Grosart was the first of Marvell's many biographers to
discover the existence of this narrative.[106:1] He found it in the
first instance, to use his own language, "in one of good trusty John
Harris' folios of _Travels and Voyages_" (two vols. folio, 1705); but
later on he made the sad discovery that this "good trusty John Harris"
had uplifted what he called his "true and particular account" from the
book of 1669 without any acknowledgment. "For ways that are dark" the
old compiler of travels was not easily excelled, but why should Mr.
Grosart have gone out of his way to call an eighteenth-century
book-maker, about whom he evidently knew nothing, "good and trusty"?
Harris was never either the one or the other, and died a pauper!

A journey to Moscow in 1663-64 was no joke. Lord Carlisle, who was
accompanied by his wife and eldest son, although ready to start from
Archangel by the end of September, was doomed to spend both the 5th of
November and Christmas Day in the gloomy town of Vologda, which they had
reached, travelling by water, on the 17th of October. Some of this time
was spent in quarrelling as to who was to supply the sledges that were
required to convey the ambassador and all his _impedimenta_ along the
now ice-bound roads to Moscow. It was one of Marvell's many duties to
remonstrate with the authorities for their cruel and disrespectful
indifference; he did so with great freedom, but with no effect, and at
last the ambassador was obliged to hire two hundred sledges at his own
charges. Sixty he sent on ahead, following with one hundred and forty on
the 15th of January 1664. It was an intensely cold journey, and the
accommodation at night, with one happy exception, proved quite infamous.
On the 3rd of February Lord Carlisle and his _cortége_ found themselves
five versts from Moscow. The 5th of February was fixed for their entry
into the city in all their finery. They were ready on the morning of
that day, awaiting the arrival of the Tsar's escort, but it never came.
Lord Carlisle had sent his cooks on to Moscow to prepare the dinner he
expected to eat in his city-quarters. Nightfall approached, and it was
not till "half an hour before night" that the belated messengers
arrived, full of excuses. The ambassador was hungry, cold, and furious,
nor did his anger abate when told he was not to be allowed to enter
Moscow that night, as the Tsar and his ladies were very anxious to
enjoy the spectacle. The return of the cooks from Moscow and the
preparation of dinner, though a mitigation, was no cure for wounded
pride, and Lord Carlisle, calling Marvell to his side, and with his
assistance, concocted a letter in Latin to the Tsar, complaining
bitterly of their ill-treatment _inter fumosi gurgustii sordes et
angustias sine cibo aut potu_, and going so far as to assert that had
anything of the kind happened in England to a foreign ambassador, the
King of England would never have rested until the offence had been
atoned for with the blood of the criminals. When, some forty years
afterwards, Peter the Great asked Queen Anne to chop off the heads of
the rude men who had arrested his ambassador for debt, he had, perhaps,
Marvell's letter before him.

On the 6th of February Lord Carlisle and his suite made their public
entry into Moscow; but so long a time was occupied over the few versts
they had to travel, that it was dusk before the Kremlin was reached.

The formal reception of the ambassador was on the 11th of February.
Marvell was in the ambassador's sledge and carried his credentials upon
a yard of red damask. The titles of the Russian Potentate would, if
printed here, fill half a page. All the Russias, Great, Little, and
White, emperies more than one, dukedoms by the dozen, territories,
countries, and dominions--not all easy to identify on the map, and very
hard to pronounce--were read out in a loud voice by Marvell. At the end
of them came the homely title of the Earl and his offices, "his
Majesty's Lieutenant in the Counties of Cumberland and Westmorland."

The letters read and delivered, the Tsar and his Boyars rose in their
places simultaneously, and their tissue vests made so strange, loud, and
unexpected a noise as to provoke the ever too easily moved risibility
of the Englishmen.[109:1] When Marvell and the rest of them had ceased
from giggling, the Tsar inquired after the health of the king, but the
distance between his Imperial Majesty and Lord Carlisle being too great
for the question to carry, it had to be repeated by those who were
nearer the ambassador, who gravely replied that when he last saw his
master, namely on the 20th of July then last past, he was perfectly
well. To the same question as to the health of "the desolate widow of
Charles the First," Carlisle returned the same cautious answer. He then
read a very long speech in English, which his interpreter turned into
Russian. The same oration was rendered into Latin by Marvell, and
presented. Over Marvell's Latin trouble arose, for the Russians were
bent on taking and giving offence. Marvell had styled the Tsar
_Illustrissimus_ when he ought, so it was alleged, to have called him
_Serenissimus_. Marvell was not a schoolmaster's son, an old scholar of
Trinity, and Milton's assistant as Latin Secretary for nothing. He
prepared a reply which, as it does not lack humour, has a distinct
literary flavour, and is all that came of the embassy, may here be given
at length:--

   "I reply, saith he, that I sent no such paper into the
   Embassy-office, but upon the desire of his Tzarskoy Majesty's
   Councellor Evan Offonassy Pronchissof, I delivered it to him, not
   being a paper of State, nor written in the English Language wherein I
   treat, nor put into the hands of the near Boyars and Councellors of
   his Tzarskoy majesty, nor subscribed by my self, nor translated into
   Russe by my Interpreter, but only as a piece of curiosity, which is
   now restored me, and I am possessed of it; so that herein his
   Tzarskoy majestie's near Boyars and Councellors are doubtless ill
   grounded. But again I say concerning the value of the words
   _Illustrissimus_ and _Serenissimus_ compared together, seeing we must
   here from affaires of State, fall into Grammatical contests
   concerning the Latin tongue; that the word _Serenus_ signifieth
   nothing but still and calm; and, therefore, though of late times
   adopted into the Titles of great Princes by reason of that benigne
   tranquility which properly dwells in the majestick countenance of
   great Princes, and that venerable stillness of all the Attendants
   that surround them, of which I have seen an excellent example when I
   was in the presence of his Tzarskoy majesty, yet is more properly
   used concerning the calmness of the weather, or season. So that even
   the night is elegantly called _Serena_ by the best Authors, Cicero in
   Arato 12, Lucretius i. l. 29. '_Serena nox_'; and upon perusing again
   what I have writ in this paper, I finde that I have out of the
   customariness of that expression my self near the beginning said, And
   that most serene night, &c. Whereas on the contrary _Illustris_ in
   its proper derivation and signification expresseth that which is all
   resplendent, lightsome, and glorious, as well without as within, and
   that not with a secondary but with a primitive and original light.
   For if the Sun be, as he is, the first fountain of light, and Poets
   in their expressions (as is well known) are higher by much than those
   that write in Prose, what else is it when Ovid in the 2. of the
   Metamorphoses saith of Phoebus speaking with Phaëthon, _Qui terque
   quaterque concutiens Illustre caput_, and the Latin Orators, as
   Pliny, Ep. 139, when they would say the highest thing that can be
   exprest upon any subject, word it thus, _Nihil Illustrius dicere
   possum_. So that hereby may appear to his Tzarskoy Majestie's near
   Boyars and Counsellors what diminution there is to his Tzarskoy
   Majesty (which farr be it from my thoughts) if I appropriate
   _Serenissimus_ to my Master and _Illustrissimus_ to Him than which
   _nihil dici potest Illustrius_. But because this was in the time of
   the purity of the Latin tongue, when the word _Serenus_ was never
   used in the Title of any Prince or Person, I shall go on to deale
   with the utmost candor, forasmuch as in this Nation the nicety of
   that most eloquent language is not so perfectly understood, which
   gives occasion to these mistakes. I confess therefore that indeed in
   the declination of the Latin tongue, and when there scarce could be
   found out words enough to supply the modern ambition of Titles,
   Serenissimus as several other words hath grown in fashion for a
   compellation of lesser as well as greater Princes, and yet befits
   both the one and the other. So there is _Serenissima Respublica
   Veneta_, _Serenitates Electoriæ_, _Serenitates Regiæ_, even as the
   word Highness or _Celsitudo_ befits a Duke, a Prince, a King, or an
   Emperour, adjoyning to it the respective quality, and so the word
   _Illustris_. But suppose it were by modern use (which I deny)
   depressed from the undoubted superiority that it had of _Serenus_ in
   the purest antiquity, yet being added in the transcendent degree to
   the word Emperour, the highest denomination that a Prince is capable
   of, it becomes of the same value. So that to interpret
   _Illustrissimus_ unto diminution is to find a positive in a
   superlative, and in the most orient light to seek for darkness. And I
   would, seeing the near Boyars and Counsellors of his Tzarskoy Majesty
   are pleased to mention the Title given to his Tzarskoy Majesty by his
   Cesarian Majesty, gladly be satisfied by them, whether ever any
   Cesarian Majesty writ formerly hither in High-Dutch, and whether then
   they styled his Tzarskoy Majesty Durchluchtigste which is the same
   with _Illustrissimus_, and which I believe the Cæsar hath kept for
   Himself. But to cut short, his Royal Majesty hath used the word to
   his Tzarskoy Majesty in his Letter, not out of imitation of others,
   although even in the Dutch Letter to his Tzarskoy Majesty of 16 June
   1663, I finde Durchlauchtigste the same (as I said) with
   _Illustrissimus_, but out of the constant use of his own Court,
   further joyning before it Most High, Most Potent, and adding after it
   Great Lord Emperour, which is an higher Title than any Prince in the
   World gives his Tzarskoy Majesty, and as high a Title of honour as
   can be given to any thing under the Divinity. For the King my Master
   who possesses as considerable Dominions, and by as high and
   self-dependent a right as any Prince in the Universe, yet contenting
   Himself with the easiest Titles, and satisfying Himself in the
   essence of things, doth most willingly give to other Princes the
   Titles which are appropriated to them, but to the Tzarskoy Majesties
   of Russia his Royal Ancestors, and to his present Tzarskoy Majesty
   his Royal Majesty himself, have usually and do gladly pay Titles even
   to superfluity out of meer kindness. And upon that reason He added
   the word most Illustrious, and so did I use it in the Latin of my
   speech. Yet, that You may find I did not out of any criticisme of
   honor, but for distinction sake use it as I did, You may see in one
   place of the same speech _Serenitas_, speaking of his Tzarskoy
   Majesty: and I would have used _Serenissimus_ an hundred times
   concerning his Tzarskoy Majesty, had I thought it would have pleased
   Him better. And I dare promise You that his Majesty will upon the
   first information from me stile him _Serenissimus_, and I
   (notwithstanding what I have said) shall make little difficulty of
   altering the word in that speech, and of delivering it so to You,
   with that protestation that I have not in using that word
   _Illustrissimus_ erred nor used any diminution (which God forbid) to
   his Tzarskoy Majesty, but on the contrary after the example of the
   King my Master intended and shewed him all possible honor. And so God
   grant all happiness to His most high, most Potent, most Illustrious,
   and most Serene Tzarskoy Majesty, and that the friendship may daily
   increase betwixt His said Majesty and his most Serene Majesty my
   Master."

On the 19th of February the Tsar invited Lord Carlisle and his suite to
a dinner, which, beginning at two o'clock, lasted till eleven, when it
was prematurely broken up by the Tsar's nose beginning to bleed. Five
hundred dishes were served, but there were no napkins, and the
table-cloths only just covered the boards. There were Spanish wines,
white and red mead, Puaz and strong waters. The English ambassador was
not properly placed at table, not being anywhere near the Tsar, and his
faithful suite shared his resentment. Time went on, but no diplomatic
progress was made. The Tsar would not renew the privileges of the
British merchants; Easter was spent in Moscow, May also--and still
nothing was done. Carlisle, in a huff, determined to go away, and,
somewhat to the distress of his followers, refused to accept the costly
sables sent by the Tzar, not only to the ambassador, Lady Carlisle, and
Lord Morpeth, but to the secretaries and others. The Tzar thereupon
returned the plate which our king had sent him, which plate Lord
Carlisle seems to have appropriated, no doubt with diplomatic
correctness, as his perquisite in lieu of the sables; but the suite got
nothing.

The embassy left Moscow on the 24th of June for Novgorod and Riga, and
after visiting Stockholm and Copenhagen, Lord Carlisle and Marvell
reached London on the 30th of January 1665.

During Marvell's absence war had been declared with the Dutch. It was
never difficult to go to war with the Dutch. The king was always in want
of money, and as no proper check existed over war supplies, he took what
he wanted out of them. The merchants on 'Change desired war, saying that
the trade of the world was too little for both England and Holland, and
that one or the other "must down." The English manufacturers, who felt
the sting of their Dutch competitors, were always in favour of war. Then
the growing insolence of the Dutch in the Indies was not to be borne.
Stories were circulated how the Hollanders had proclaimed themselves
"Lords of the Southern Seas," and meant to deny English ships the right
of entry in that quarter of the globe. A baronet called on Pepys and
pulled out of his pocket letters from the East Indies, full of sad tales
of Englishmen having been actually thrashed inside their own factory at
Surat by swaggering Dutchmen, who had insulted the flag of St. George,
and swore they were going to be the masters "out there." Pepys, who
knew a little about the state of the royal navy, listened sorrowfully
and was content to hope that the war would not come until "we are more
ready for it."

In the House of Commons the prudent men were against the war, and were
at once accused of being in the pay of the Dutch. The king's friends
were all for the war, and nobody doubted that some of the money voted
for it would find its way into their pockets, or at all events that
pensions would reward their fidelity. A third group who favoured the war
were supposed to do so because their disloyalty and fanaticism always
disposed them to trouble the waters in which they wished to fish.

The war began in November 1664, and on the 24th of that month the king
opened Parliament and demanded money. He got it. Clarendon describes how
Sir Robert Paston from Norfolk, a back-bench man, "who was no frequent
speaker, but delivered what he had a mind to say very clearly," stood up
and proposed a grant of two and a half million pounds, to be spread over
three years. So huge a sum took the House by surprise. Nobody spoke;
"they sat in amazement." Somebody at last found his voice and moved a
much smaller sum, but no one seconded him. Sir Robert Paston ultimately
found supporters, "no man who had any relation to the Court speaking a
word." The Speaker put Sir Robert Paston's motion as the question, "and
the affirmative made a good sound, and very few gave their negative
aloud." But Clarendon adds, "it was notorious very many sat silent."

The war was not in its early stages unpopular, being for the control of
the sea, for the right of search, for the fishing trade, for mastery of
the "gorgeous East." The Admiralty had been busy, and a hundred
frigates, well gunned, were ready for the blue water by February 1665.
The Duke of York, who took the command, was a keen sailor, though his
unhappy notions as to patronage, and its exercise, were fatal to an
efficient service. On the 3rd of June the duke had his one victory; it
was off the roadstead of Harwich, and the roar of his artillery was
heard in Westminster. It was a fierce fight; the king's great friend,
Charles Berkeley, just made a peer and about to be made a duke, Lord
Muskerry and young Richard Boyle, all on the duke's ship the _Royal
Charles_, were killed by one shot, their blood and brains flying in the
duke's face. The Earls of Marlborough and Portland were killed. The
gallant Lawson, who rose from the ranks in Cromwell's time, an
Anabaptist and a Republican, but still in high command, received on
board his ship, the _Royal Oak_, a fatal wound. On the other side the
Dutch admiral, Opdam, was blown into the air with his ship and crew. The
Dutch fleet was scattered, and fled, after a loss estimated at
twenty-four ships and eight thousand men killed and wounded; England
lost no ship and but six hundred men.

The victory was not followed up. Some say the duke lost nerve. Tromp was
allowed to lead a great part of the fleet away in safety, and when the
great De Ruyter was recalled from the West Indies he was soon able to
assume the command of a formidable number of fighting craft.

In less than ten days after this great engagement the plague appeared in
London, a terrible and a solemnising affliction, lasting the rest of the
year. It was at its worst in September, when in one week more than seven
thousand died of it. The total number of its dead is estimated at
sixty-eight thousand five hundred and ninety-six.

On account of the plague Parliament was summoned to meet at Oxford in
October 1665.

Marvell must have reached Oxford in good time, for the Admission Book of
the Bodleian records his visit to the library on the last day of
September. His first letter from Oxford is dated 15th October, and in it
he tells the corporation that the House, "upon His Majesty's
representation of the necessity of further supplies in reference to the
Dutch War and probability of the French embracing their interests, hath
voted the King £1,250,000 additional to be levied in two years." The
king, who was the frankest of mortals in speech, though false as Belial
in action, told the House that he had already spent all the money
previously voted and must have more, especially if France was to prefer
the friendship of Holland to his. Amidst loud acclamations the money was
voted. The French ambassadors, who were in Oxford, saw for themselves
the temper of Parliament.

Notwithstanding the terrible plight of the capital, Oxford was gaiety
itself. The king was accompanied by his consort, who then was hopeful of
an heir, and also by Lady Castlemaine and Miss Stewart. Lady Castlemaine
did not escape the shaft of University wit, for a stinging couplet was
set up during the night on her door, for the discovery of the authorship
of which a reward of £1000 was offered. It may very well have been
Marvell's.[116:1]

The Duke of Monmouth gave a ball to the queen and her ladies, where,
after the queen's retirement, "Mrs. Stewart was extraordinary merry,"
and sang "French songs with great skill."[116:2]

Ten Acts of Parliament received the royal assent at Oxford, of which
but one is still remembered in certain quarters--the Five Mile Act,
which Marvell briefly describes as an Act "for debarring ejected
Nonconformists from living in or near Corporations (where they had
formerly pursued their callings), unless taking the new Oath and
Declaration." Parliament was prorogued at the end of October.

Another visitation of Providence was soon to befall the capital. On
Sunday morning, the 2nd of September, Pepys was aroused by one of his
maid-servants at 3 A.M. to look at a fire. He could not make out much
about it and went to bed again, but when he rose at seven o'clock it was
still burning, so he left his house and made his way to the Tower, from
whence he saw London Bridge aflame, and describes how the poor pigeons,
loth to leave their homes, fluttered about the balconies, until with
singed wings they fell into the flames. After gazing his fill he went to
Whitehall and had an interview with the king, who at once ordered his
barge and proceeded downstream to his burning City, and to the
assistance of a distracted Lord Mayor.

The fire raged four days, and made an end of old London, a picturesque
and even beautiful City. St. Paul's, both the church and the school, the
Royal Exchange, Ludgate, Fleet Street as far as the Inner Temple, were
by the 7th of the month smoking ruins. Four hundred streets, eighty-nine
churches (just a church an hour, so the curious noted), warehouses
unnumbered with all their varied contents, whole editions of books,
valuable and the reverse of valuable, were wiped out of existence. Rents
to an enormous amount ceased to be represented any longer by the houses
that paid them. How was the king to get his chimney-money? How were
merchants to meet their obligations? The parsons on Sunday, the 9th of
September, ought to have had no difficulty in finding texts for their
sermons. Pepys went to church twice, but without edification, and
certainly Dean Harding, whom he heard complaining in the evening "that
the City had been reduced from a folio to a duo decimo," hardly rose to
the dignity of the occasion.

Strange to say, not a life was actually lost in the fire,[118:1] though
some old Londoners (among them Edmund Calamy's grandfather) died of
grief, and others (and among them Shirley the dramatist and his wife)
from exposure and exhaustion. One hysterical foreigner, who insisted
that he lit the flame, was executed, though no sensible man believed
what he said. It was long the boast of the merchants of London that no
one of their number "broke" in consequence of the great fire.

Unhappily the belief was widespread, as that "tall bully," the monument,
long testified, that the fire was the work of the Roman Catholics, and
aliens, suspected of belonging to our old religion, found it dangerous
to walk the streets whilst the embers still smoked, which they continued
to do for six months.

The meeting of Parliament was a little delayed in consequence of this
national disaster, and when it did meet at the end of the month, Marvell
reports the appointment of two Committees, one "about the Fire of
London," and the other "to receive informations of the insolence of the
Popish priests and Jesuits, and of the increase of Popery." The latter
Committee almost at once reported to the House, to quote from Marvell's
letter of the 27th of October, "that his Majesty be desired to issue out
his proclamation that all Popish priests and Jesuits, except such as not
being natural-born subjects, or belong to the Queen Mother and Queen
Consort, be banished in thirty days or else the law be executed upon
them, that all Justices of Peace and officers concerned put the laws in
execution against Papists and suspected Papists in order to their
execution, and that all officers, civil or military, not taking the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance within twenty days be displaced."

In a very real sense the great fire of London continued to smoke for
many a weary year, and to fill the air with black suspicions and civil
discord.

Parliament had not sat long before it was discovered that a change had
taken place in its temper and spirit. The plague and the fire had
contributed to this change. The London clergy had not exhibited great
devotion during the former affliction. Many of the incumbents deserted
their flocks, and their empty pulpits had been filled by zealots, who
preached "Woe unto Jerusalem." The profligacy of the Court, and the
general decay of manners, when added to the severity of the legislation
against the Nonconformists, gave the ejected clergy opportunities for a
renewal of their spiritual ministrations, and as usual their labours,
_pro salute animarum_, aroused political dissatisfaction. Some of the
more outrageous supporters of the royal prerogative, the renegade May
among them, professed to see in the fire a punishment upon the spirit of
freedom, for which the City had once been famous, and urged the king not
to suffer it to be rebuilt again "to be a bit in his mouth and a bridle
upon his neck, but to keep it all open," and that his troops might enter
whenever he thought necessary, "there being no other way to govern that
rude multitude but by force."

Rabid nonsense of this kind had no weight with the king, who never
showed his native good sense more conspicuously than in the pains he
took over the rebuilding of London; but none the less it had its effect
in getting rid once and for ever of that spirit of excessive (besotted
is Hallam's word) loyalty which had characterised the Restoration.

The king, of course, wanted money, nor was Parliament disposed to refuse
it, we being still at war with Holland; but to the horror of that
elderly pedant, Lord Clarendon, the Commons passed a Bill appointing a
commission of members of both Houses "to inspect"--I am now quoting
Marvell--"and examine thoroughly the former expense of the £2,800,000,
of the £1,250,000 of the Militia money, of the prize goods, etc." In an
earlier letter Marvell attributes the new temper of Parliament, "not to
any want of ardour to supply the public necessities, but out of our
House's sense also of the burden to be laid upon the subject." Clarendon
was so alarmed that he advised a dissolution. Charles was alarmed, too,
knowing well that both Carteret, the Treasurer of the Navy, and Lord
Ashley, the Treasurer of the Prize Money, issued out many sums upon the
king's warrant, for which no accounts could be produced, but he was
still more frightened of a new Parliament. In the present Parliament he
had, so Clarendon admits, "a hundred members of his own menial servants
and their near relations." The bishops were also against a dissolution,
dreading the return of Presbyterian members, so Clarendon's advice was
not followed, and the king very reluctantly consented to the commission,
about which Pepys has so much to say. It did not get appointed at once,
but when it did Pepys rejoices greatly that its secretary, Mr. Jessopp,
was "an old fashioned Cromwell man"; in other words, both honest and
efficient.

The shrewd Secretary of the Navy Office here puts his finger on the
real plague-spot of the Restoration. Our Puritan historians write rather
loosely about "the floodgates of dissipation," etc., having been flung
open by that event as if it had wrought a sudden change in human nature.
Mr. Pepys, whose frank Diary begins during the Protectorate, underwent
no such change. He was just the same sinner under Cromwell as he was
under Charles. Sober, grave divines may be found deploring the growing
profligacy of the times long before the 29th of May 1660. An era of
extravagance was evidently to be expected. No doubt the king's return
assisted it. No country could be anything but the worse for having
Charles the Second as its "most religious King." The Restoration of the
Stuarts was the best "excuse for a glass" ever offered to an Englishman.
He availed himself of it with even more than his accustomed freedom. But
it cannot be said that the king's debauchery was ever approved of even
in London. Both the mercurial Pepys and the grave Evelyn alike deplore
it. The misfortune clearly attributable to the king's return was the
substitution of a corrupt, inefficient, and unpatriotic administration
for the old-fashioned servants of the public whom Cromwell had gathered
round him.

Parliament was busy with new taxes. In November 1666 Marvell writes:--

   "The Committee has prepared these votes. All persons shall pay one
   shilling per poll, all aliens two, all Nonconformists and papists
   two, all servants one shilling in the pound of their wages, all
   personal estates shall pay for so much as is not already taxed by the
   land-tax, after twenty shillings in the hundred. Cattle, corn, and
   household furniture shall be excepted, and all such stock-in-trade as
   is already taxed by the land-tax, but the rest to be liable."

Stringent work! Later on we read:--

   "Three shillings in the pound for all offices and public employments,
   except military; lawyers and physicians proportionate to their
   practice."

Here is the income-tax long before Mr. Pitt.

The House of Lords, trembling on the verge of a breach of privilege,
altered this Poll Bill. Marvell writes in January 1667:--

   "We have not advanced much this week; the alterations of the Lords
   upon the Poll Bill have kept us busy. We have disagreed in most.
   Aliens we adhere to pay double. Nonconformists we agree with them
   _not_ to pay double (126 to 91), to allow no exemptions from patents
   to free from paying, we adhere; and we also rejected a long clause
   whereby they as well as the Commoners pretend distinctly to give to
   the King, and to-day we send up our reasons."

The Lords agreed, and the Bill passed.

Ireland supplied a very stormy measure. I am afraid Marvell was on the
wrong side, but owing to his reserve I am not sure. An Irish Cattle Bill
was a measure very popular in the House of Commons, its object being to
prevent Ireland from sending over live beasts to be fattened, killed,
and consumed in England. You can read all about it in Clarendon's _Life_
(vol. iii. pp. 704-720, 739), and think you are reading about Canadian
cattle to-day. The breeders (in a majority) were on one side, and the
owners of pasture-land on the other. The breeders said the Irish cattle
were bred in Ireland for nothing and transported for little, that they
undersold the English-bred cattle, and consequently "the breed of Cattle
in the Kingdom was totally given over," and rents fell. Other members
contended in their places "that their countries had no land bad enough
to breed, and that their traffic consisted in buying lean cattle and
making them fat, and upon this they paid their rent." Nobody, except the
king, gave a thought to Ireland. He, in this not unworthy of his great
Tudor predecessor, Henry the Eighth, declared he was King of Ireland no
less than of England, and would do nothing to injure one portion of his
dominions for the benefit of another. But as usual he gave way, being in
great straits for money. The House of Lords was better disposed towards
Ireland than the House of Commons, but they too yielded to selfish
clamour, and the Bill, which had excited great fury, became law, and
proved ineffective, owing (as was alleged) to that corruption which
restrictions on trade seem to have the trick of breeding.[123:1]

It is always agreeable to be reminded that however large a part of our
history is composed of the record of passion, greed, delusion, and
stupidity, yet common-sense, the love of order and of justice (in
matters of business), have usually been the predominant factors in our
national life, despite priest, merchant, and party.

Nowhere is this better illustrated than by two measures to which Marvell
refers as Bills "for the prevention of lawsuits between landlord and
tenant" and for "the Rebuilding of London." Both these Bills became law
in February 1668, within five months of the great catastrophe that was
their occasion. Two more sensible, well-planned, well-drawn, courageous
measures were never piloted through both Houses. King, Lords and
Commons, all put their heads together to face a great emergency and to
provide an immediate remedy.

The Bill to prevent lawsuits is best appreciated if we read its
preamble:--

   "Whereas the greatest part of the houses in the City of London having
   been burnt by the dreadful and dismal fire which happened in
   September last, many of the Tenants, under-tenants, and late
   occupiers are liable unto suits and actions to compel them to repair
   and to rebuild the same, and to pay their rents as if the same had
   not been burnt, and are not relievable therefor in any ordinary
   course of law; and great differences are likely to arise concerning
   the Repairs and rebuilding the said houses, and payment of rents
   which, if they should not be determined with speed and without
   charge, would much obstruct the rebuilding of the s^d City. And for
   that it is just that everyone concerned should bear a proportionate
   share of this loss according to their several interests wherein in
   respect of the multitude of cases, varying in their circumstances, no
   certain general rule can be prescribed."

After this recital it was enacted that the judges of the King's Bench
and Common Pleas and the Barons of the Exchequer, or any three or more
of them, should form a Court of Record to hear and determine every
possible dispute or difference arising out of the great fire, whether
relating to liability to repair, and rebuild, or to pay rent, or for
arrears of rent (other than arrears which had accrued due before the 1st
of September) or otherwise howsoever. The proceedings were to be by
summary process, _sine forma et figura judicii_ and without court fees.
The judges were to be bound by no rules either of law or equity, and
might call for what evidence they chose, including that of the
interested parties, and try the case as it best could be tried. Their
orders were to be final and not (save in a single excepted case) subject
to any appeal. All persons in remainder and reversion were to be bound
by these orders, although infants, married women, idiots, beyond seas,
or under any other disability. A special power was given to order the
surrender of existing leases, and to grant new ones for terms not
exceeding forty years. The judges gave their services for nothing, and,
for once, released from all their own trammels, set to work to do
substantial justice between landlord and tenant, personalty and realty,
the life interest and the remainder, covenantor and covenantee, after a
fashion which excited the admiration and won the confidence of the whole
City. The ordinary suitor, still left exposed to the pitfalls of the
special pleader, the risks (owing to the exclusion of evidence) of a
non-suit and the costly cumbersomeness of the Court of Chancery, must
often have wished that the subject-matter of his litigation had perished
in the flames of the great fire.

This court sat in Clifford's Inn, and was usually presided over by Sir
Matthew Hale, whose skill both as an arithmetician and an architect
completed his fitness for so responsible a position. Within a year the
work was done.

The Act for rebuilding the City is an elaborate measure of more than
forty clauses, and aimed at securing "the regularity, safety,
conveniency and beauty" of the new London that was to be. The buildings
were classified according to their position and character, and had to
maintain a prescribed level of quality. The materials to be employed
were named. New streets were to be of certain widths, and so on. This is
the Act that contains the first Betterment Clause: "And forasmuch as the
Houses now remaining and to be rebuilt will receive more or less
advantage in the value of the rents by the liberty of air and free
recourse for trade," it was enacted that a jury might be sworn to
assess upon the owners and others interested of and in the said houses,
such sum or sums of money with respect of their several interests "in
consideration of such improvement and melioration as in reason and good
conscience they shall think fit."

It takes nothing short of a catastrophe to suspend in England, even for
a few months, those rules of evidence that often make justice
impossible, and those rights of landlords which for centuries have
appropriated public expenditure to private gain.[126:1]

The moneys required to pay for the land taken under the Act to widen
streets and to accomplish the other authorised works were raised, as
Marvell informs his constituents, by a tax of twelve pence on every
chaldron of coal coming as far as Gravesend. Few taxes have had so
useful and so harmless a life.

All this time the Dutch War was going on, but the heart was out of it.
Nothing in England is so popular as war, except the peace that comes
after it. The king now wanted peace, and the merchants on 'Change had
glutted their ire. In February 1667 the king told the Houses of
Parliament that all "sober" men would be glad to see peace. Unluckily,
it seems to have been assumed that we could have peace whenever we
wanted it, and the fatal error was committed of at once "laying up" the
first-and second-rate ships. It thus came about that, whilst still at
war, England had no fleet to put to sea. It did not at first seem likely
that the overtures for peace would present much difficulty, when
suddenly arose the question of Poleroone. It is amazing how few
Englishmen have ever heard of Poleroone, or even of the Banda Islands,
of which group it is one. Indeed, a more insignificant speck in the
ocean it would be hard to find. To discover it on an atlas is no easy
task. Yet, but for Poleroone, the Dutch would never have taken
Sheerness, or broken the chain at Gillingham, or carried away with them
to the Texel the proud vessel that had brought back Charles the Second
to an excited population.

Poleroone is a small nutmeg-growing island in the Indian Archipelago,
not far from the eastern extremity of New Guinea. King James the First
imagined he had some right to it, and, at any rate, Oliver Cromwell,
when he made peace with the Dutch, made a great point of Poleroone. Have
it he would for the East India Company. The Dutch objected, but gave
way, and by an article in the treaty with Oliver bound themselves to
give up Poleroone to the Company. All, in fact, that they did do, was to
cut down the nutmeg trees, and so make the island good for nothing for
many a long year. Physical possession was never taken. For some
unaccountable reason Charles, who had sold Oliver's Dunkirk to the
French for half a million of money, stuck out for Poleroone. What
Cromwell had taken he was not going to give up! On the other hand,
neither would the Dutch give up Poleroone. This dispute, about a barren
island, delayed the settlement of the peace preliminaries; but
eventually the British plenipotentiaries did get out to Breda, in May
1667. Our sanguine king expected an immediate cessation of hostilities,
and that his unpreparedness would thus be huddled up. All of a sudden,
at the beginning of June, De Ruyter led out his fleet, and with a fair
wind behind him stood for the Thames. All is fair in war. England was
caught napping. The doleful history reads like that of a sudden
piratical onslaught, and reveals the fatal inefficiency of the
administration. Sheerness was practically defenceless. "There were a
Company or two of very good soldiers there under excellent officers, but
the fortifications were so weak and unfinished, and all other provisions
so entirely wanting, that the Dutch Fleet no sooner approached within a
distance but with their cannon they beat all the works flat and drove
all the men from the ground, which, as soon as they had done with their
Boats, they landed men and seemed resolved to fortify and keep
it."[128:1] Capture of Sheerness by the Dutch! No need of a halfpenny
press to spread this news through a London still in ruins. What made
matters worse, the sailors were more than half-mutinous, being paid with
tickets not readily convertible into cash. Many of them actually
deserted to the Dutch fleet, which made its leisurely way upstream,
passing Upnor Castle, which had guns but no ammunition, till it was
almost within reach of Chatham, where lay the royal navy. General Monk,
who was the handy man of the period, and whose authority was always
invoked when the king he had restored was in greater trouble than usual,
had hastily collected what troops he could muster, and marched to
protect Chatham; but what were wanted were ships, not troops. The Dutch
had no mind to land, and after firing three warships (the _Royal James_,
the _Royal Oak_, and the _London_), and capturing the _Royal Charles_,
"they thought they had done enough, and made use of the ebb to carry
them back again."[129:1] These events occupied the tenth to the
fifteenth of June, and for the impression they produced on Marvell's
mind we are not dependent upon his restrained letters to his
constituents, but can turn to his longest rhymed satire, which is
believed to have been first printed, anonymously of course, as a
broadsheet in August 1667.

This poem is called _The Last Instructions to a Painter about the Dutch
Wars_, 1667. The title was derived from Waller's panegyric poem on the
occasion of the Duke of York's victory over the Dutch on the 3rd of June
1665, when Opdam, the Dutch admiral, was blown up with his ship.[129:2]
Sir John Denham, a brother satirist of Marvell's, and with as good an
excuse for hating the Duke of York as this world affords, had seized
upon the same idea and published four satirical poems on these same
Dutch Wars, entitled _Directions to a Painter_ (see _Poems on Affairs of
State_, 1703, vol. i.).

Marvell's satire, which runs to 900 lines, is essentially a House of
Commons poem, and could only have been written by a member. It is
intensely "lobbyish" and "occasional." To understand its allusions, to
appreciate its "pain-giving" capacity to the full, is now impossible.
Still, the reader of Clarendon's _Life_, Pepys's _Diary_, and Burnet's
_History_, to name only popular books, will have no difficulty in
entering into the spirit of the performance. As a poem it is rough in
execution, careless, breathless. A rugged style was then in vogue. Even
Milton could write his lines to the Cambridge Carrier somewhat in this
manner. Marvell has nothing of the magnificence of Dryden, or of the
finished malice of Pope. He plays the part, and it is sincerely played,
of the old, honest member of Parliament who loves his country and hates
rogues and speaks right out, calling spades spades and the king's women
what they ought to be called. He is conversational, and therefore
coarse. The whole history of the events that resulted in the national
disgrace is told.

    "The close cabal marked how the Navy eats
    And thought all lost that goes not to the cheats;
    So therefore secretly for peace decrees,
    Yet for a War the Parliament would squeeze,
    And fix to the revenue such a sum
    Should Goodricke silence and make Paston dumb.
    ...
    Meantime through all the yards their orders were
    To lay the ships up, cease the keels begun.
    The timber rots, the useless axe does rust,
    The unpractised saw lies buried in the dust,
    The busy hammer sleeps, the ropes untwine."

Parliament is got rid of to the joy of Clarendon.

    "Blither than hare that hath escaped the hounds,
    The house prorogued, the chancellor rebounds.
    What frosts to fruits, what arsenic to the rat,
    What to fair Denham mortal chocolate,[130:1]
    What an account to Carteret, that and more,
    A parliament is to the chancellor."

De Ruyter makes his appearance, and Monk

          "in his shirt against the Dutch is pressed.
    Often, dear Painter, have I sat and mused
    Why he should be on all adventures used.
    Whether his valour they so much admire,
    Or that for cowardice they all retire,
    As heaven in storms, they call, in gusts of state,
    On Monk and Parliament--yet both do hate.
    ...
    Ruyter, the while, that had our ocean curbed,
    Sailed now amongst our rivers undisturbed;
    Surveyed their crystal streams and banks so green,
    And beauties ere this never naked seen."

His flags fly from the topmasts of his ships, but where is the enemy?

    "So up the stream the Belgic navy glides,
    And at Sheerness unloads its stormy sides."

Chatham was but a few miles further up.

    "There our sick ships unrigged in summer lay,
    Like moulting fowl, a weak and easy prey,
    For whose strong bulk earth scarce could timber find,
    The ocean water, or the heavens wind.
    Those oaken giants of the ancient race,
    That ruled all seas, and did our channel grace;
    The conscious stag, though once the forest's dread,
    Flies to the wood, and hides his armless head.
    Ruyter forthwith a squadron doth untack;
    They sail securely through the river's track.
    An English pilot too (O, shame! O, sin!)
    Cheated of 's pay, was he that showed them in."

The chain at Gillingham is broken, to the dismay of Monk, who

            "from the bank that dismal sight does view;
    Our feather gallants, who came down that day
    To be spectators safe of the new play,
    Leave him alone when first they hear the gun,
    (Cornbury,[131:1] the fleetest) and to London run.
    Our seamen, whom no danger's shape could fright,
    Unpaid, refuse to mount their ships for spite,
    Or to their fellows swim on board the Dutch,
    Who show the tempting metal in their clutch."

Upnor Castle avails nought.

    "And Upnor's Castle's ill-deserted wall
    Now needful does for ammunition call."

The _Royal Charles_ is captured before Monk's face.

    "That sacred Keel that had, as he, restored
    Its excited sovereign on its happy board,
    Now a cheap spoil and the mean victor's slave
    Taught the Dutch colours from its top to wave."

Horrors accumulate.

    "Each doleful day still with fresh loss returns,
    The loyal _London_ now a third time burns,
    And the true _Royal Oak_ and _Royal James_,
    Allied in fate, increase with theirs her flames.
    Of all our navy none shall now survive,
    But that the ships themselves were taught to dive,
    And the kind river in its creek them hides.
    Freighting their pierced keels with oozy tides."

The situation was indeed serious enough. One wiseacre in command in
London declared his belief that the Tower was no longer "tenable."

    "And were not Ruyter's maw with ravage cloyed,
    Even London's ashes had been then destroyed."

But the Dutch admiral returns the way he came.

    "Now nothing more at Chatham's left to burn,
    The Holland squadron leisurely return;
    And spite of Ruperts and of Albemarles,
    To Ruyter's triumph led the captive _Charles_.
    The pleasing sight he often does prolong,
    Her mast erect, tough cordage, timber strong,
    Her moving shape, all these he doth survey,
    And all admires, but most his easy prey.
    The seamen search her all within, without;
    Viewing her strength, they yet their conquest doubt;
    Then with rude shouts, secure, the air they vex,
    With gamesome joy insulting on her decks.
    Such the feared Hebrew captive, blinded, shorn,
    Was led about in sport, the public scorn."

The poet then indulges himself in an emotional outburst.

    "Black day, accursed! on thee let no man hail
    Out of the port, or dare to hoist a sail,
    Or row a boat in thy unlucky hour!
    Thee, the year's monster, let thy dam devour,
    And constant Time, to keep his course yet right,
    Fill up thy space with a redoubled night.
    When agèd Thames was bound with fetters base,
    And Medway chaste ravished before his face,
    And their dear offspring murdered in their sight,
    Thou and thy fellows saw the odious light.
    Sad change, since first that happy pair was wed,
    When all the rivers graced their nuptial bed;
    And father Neptune promised to resign
    His empire old to their immortal line;
    Now with vain grief their vainer hopes they rue,
    Themselves dishonoured, and the gods untrue;
    And to each other, helpless couple, moan,
    As the sad tortoise for the sea does groan:
    But most they for their darling Charles complain,
    And were it burned, yet less would be their pain.
    To see that fatal pledge of sea-command,
    Now in the ravisher De Ruyter's hand,
    The Thames roared, swooning Medway turned her tide,
    And were they mortal, both for grief had died."

A scapegoat had, of course, to be at once provided. He was found in Mr.
Commissioner Pett, the most skilful shipbuilder of the age.

    "After this loss, to relish discontent,
    Some one must be accused by Parliament.
    All our miscarriages on Pett must fall,
    His name alone seems fit to answer all.
    Whose counsel first did this mad war beget?
    Who all commands sold through the navy? Pett.
    Who would not follow when the Dutch were beat?
    Who treated out the time at Bergen? Pett.
    Who the Dutch fleet with storms disabled met?
    And, rifling prizes, them neglect? Pett.
    Who with false news prevented the Gazette?
    The fleet divided? writ for Rupert? Pett.
    Who all our seamen cheated of their debt,
    And all our prizes who did swallow? Pett.
    Who did advise no navy out to set?
    And who the forts left unprepared? Pett.
    Who to supply with powder did forget
    Languard, Sheerness, Gravesend, and Upnor? Pett.
    Who all our ships exposed in Chatham net?
    Who should it be but the fanatic Pett?"

This outburst can hardly fail to remind the reader of a famous outburst
of Mr. Micawber's on the subject of Uriah Heep.

The satire concludes with the picture of the king in the dead shades of
night, alone in his room, startled by loud noises of cannons, trumpets,
and drums, and then visited by the ghost of his father.

    "And ghastly Charles, turning his collar low,
    The purple thread about his neck does show."

The pensive king resolves on Clarendon's disgrace, and on rising next
morning seeks out Lady Castlemaine, Bennet, and Coventry, who give him
the same advice. He knows them all three to be false to one another and
to him, but is for the moment content to do what they wish.

I have omitted, in this review of a long poem, the earlier lines which
deal with the composition of the House of Commons. All its parties are
described, one after another--the old courtiers, the pension-hunters,
the king's procurers, then almost a department of State.

    "Then the Procurers under Prodgers filed
    Gentlest of men, and his lieutenant mild
    Bronkard, love's squire; through all the field arrayed,
    No troop was better clad, nor so well paid."

Clarendon had his friends, soon sorely to be needed, and after them,

    "Next to the lawyers, sordid band, appear,
    Finch in the front and Thurland in the rear."

Some thirty-three members are mentioned by their names and habits. The
Speaker, Sir Edward Turner, is somewhat unkindly described. Honest men
are usually to be found everywhere, and they existed even in Charles the
Second's pensionary Parliament:--

    "Nor could all these the field have long maintained
    But for the unknown reserve that still remained;
    A gross of English gentry, nobly born,
    Of clear estates, and to no faction sworn,
    Dear lovers of their king, and death to meet
    For country's cause, that glorious thing and sweet;
    To speak not forward, but in action brave,
    In giving generous, but in council grave;
    Candidly credulous for once, nay twice;
    But sure the devil cannot cheat them thrice."

No member of Parliament's library is complete without Marvell, who did
not forget the House of Commons smoking-room:--

    "Even iron Strangways chafing yet gave back
    Spent with fatigue, to breathe awhile tabac."

Charles hastened to make peace with Holland. He was not the man to
insist on vengeance or to mourn over lost prestige. De Ruyter had gone
after suffering repulses at Portsmouth, Plymouth, and Torbay. Peace was
concluded at Breda on the 21st of July. We gave up Poleroone. _Per
contra_ we gained a more famous place, New Amsterdam, rechristened New
York in honour of the duke. All prisoners were to be liberated, and the
Dutch, despite Sheerness and the _Royal Charles_, agreed to lower their
flag to all British ships of war.

The fall, long pending, of Clarendon immediately followed the peace.
Men's tempers were furious or sullen. Hyde had no more bitter, no more
cruel enemy than Marvell. Why this was has not been discovered, but
there was nothing too bad for Marvell not to believe of any member of
Clarendon's household. All the scandals, and they were many and
horrible, relating to Clarendon and his daughter, the Duchess of York,
find a place in Marvell's satires and epigrams. To us Lord Clarendon is
a grave and thoughtful figure, the statesman-author of _The History of
the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England_, that famous, large book,
loftily planned, finely executed, full of life and character and the
philosophy of human existence; and of his own _Autobiography_, a
production which, though it must, like Burnet's _History_, be read with
caution, unveils to the reader a portion of that past which usually is
as deeply shrouded from us as the future. If at times we are reminded in
reading Clarendon's _Life_ of the old steward in Hogarth's plate, who
lifts up his hands in horror over the extravagance of his master, if his
pedantry often irritates, and his love of place displeases, we recognise
these but as the shades of the character of a distinguished and
accomplished public servant. But to Marvell Clarendon was rapacious,
ambitious, and corrupt, a man who had sold Oliver's Dunkirk to the
French, and shared the price; who had selected for the king's consort a
barren woman, so that his own damaged daughter might at least chance to
become Queen of England, who hated Parliaments and hankered after a
standing army, who took money for patents, who sold public offices, who
was bribed by the Dutch about the terms of peace, who swindled the
ruined cavaliers of the funds subscribed for their benefit, and had by
these methods heaped together great wealth which he ostentatiously
displayed. Even darker crimes than these are hinted at. That Marvell was
wrong in his estimate of Clarendon's character now seems certain;
Clarendon did not get a penny of the Dunkirk money. The case made
against him by the House of Commons in their articles of impeachment was
felt even at the time to be flimsy and incapable of proof, and in the
many records that have come to light since Clarendon's day nothing has
been discovered to give them support. And yet Marvell was a singularly
well-informed member of Parliament, a shrewd, level-headed man of
affairs, who knew Lord Clarendon in the way we know men we have to see
on business matters, whose speeches we can listen to, and whose conduct
we discuss and criticise. "Gently scan your brother-man" is a precept
Marvell never took to heart; nor is the House of Commons a place where
it is either preached or practised.

When Clarendon was well nigh at the height of his great unpopularity, he
built himself a fine big house on a site given him by the king where now
is Albemarle Street. Where did he get the money from? He employed, in
building it, the stones of St. Paul's Cathedral. True, he bought the
stones from the Dean and Chapter, but if the man you hate builds a great
house out of the ruins of a church, is it likely that so trivial a fact
as a cash payment for the materials is going to be mentioned? Splendid
furniture and noble pictures were to be seen going into the new
palace--the gifts, so it was alleged, of foreign ambassadors. What was
the consideration for these donations? England's honour! Clarendon House
was at once named Dunkirk House, Holland House, Tangiers House.

Here is Marvell upon it:--

    UPON HIS HOUSE

    "Here lie the sacred bones
    Of Paul beguilèd of his stones:
    Here lie golden briberies,
    The price of ruined families;
    The cavalier's debenture wall,
    Fixed on an eccentric basis:
    Here's Dunkirk-Town and Tangier-Hull,
    The Queen's marriage and all,
    The Dutchman's _templum pacis_."

Clarendon's fall was rapid. He knew the house of Stuart too well to
place any reliance upon the king. Evelyn visited him on the 27th of
August 1667 after the seals had been taken away from him, and found him
"in his bed-chamber very sad." His enemies were numerous and powerful,
both in the House of Commons and at Court, where all the buffoons and
ladies of pleasure hated him, because--so Evelyn says--"he thwarted some
of them and stood in their way." In November Evelyn called again and
found the late Lord-Chancellor in the garden of his new-built palace,
sitting in his gout wheel-chair and watching the new gates setting up
towards the north and the fields. "He looked and spoke very
disconsolately. After some while deploring his condition to me, I took
my leave. Next morning I heard he was gone."[139:1]

The news was true; on Saturday, the 29th of November, he drove to Erith,
and after a terrible tossing on the nobly impartial Channel the weary
man reached Calais, and died seven years later in Rouen, having well
employed his leisure in completing his history. His palace was sold for
half what it cost to the inevitable Monk, Duke of Albemarle.

On the 3rd of December Marvell writes that the House, having heard that
Lord Clarendon had "withdrawn," forthwith ordered an address to his
Majesty "that care might be taken for securing all the sea ports lest he
should pass there." Marvell adds grimly, "I suppose he will not trouble
you at Hull." The king took good care that his late Lord-Chancellor
should escape. An act of perpetual banishment was at once passed,
receiving the royal assent on the 19th of December.

Marvell was kept very busy during the early months of 1668, inquiring,
as our English fashion is, into the "miscarriages of the late war." The
House more than once sat from nine in the morning till eight at night,
finding out all it could. "What money, arising by the poll money, had
been applied to the use of the war?" This was an awkward inquiry. The
House voted that the not prosecuting the first victory of June 1665 was
a miscarriage, and one of the greatest: a snub to the Duke of York. The
not furnishing the Medway with a sufficient guard of ships, though the
king had then 18,000 men in his pay, was another great miscarriage. The
paying of the fleet with tickets, without money, was a third great
miscarriage. All this time Oliver Cromwell's skull was grinning on its
perch in Westminster Hall.

Besides the honour of England, that of Hull had to be defended by its
member. A young Lieutenant Wise, one of the Hull garrison, had in some
boisterous fashion affronted the corporation and the mayor. On this
correspondence ensues; and Marvell waits upon the Duke of Albemarle, the
head of the army, to obtain reparation.

   "I waited yesterday upon my Lord General--and first presented your
   usual fee which the General accepted, but saying that it was
   unnecessary and that you might have bin pleased to spare it, and he
   should be so much more at liberty to show how voluntary and
   affectionate he was toward your corporation. I returned the civilest
   words I could coin on for the present, and rendered him your humble
   thanks for his continued patronage of you ... and told him that you
   had further sent him up a small tribute of your Hull liquor. He
   thanked you again for all these things which you might--he said--have
   spared, and added that if the greatest of your military officers
   should demean himself ill towards you, he would take a course with
   him."

A mealy-mouthed Lord-General drawing near his end.[140:1]

Wise was removed from the Hull garrison. The affronted corporation was
not satisfied, and Marvell had to argue the point.

   "And I hope, Sir, you will incline the Bench to consider whether I am
   able or whether it be fit for me to urge it beyond that point. Yet it
   is not all his (Wise's) Parliament men and relations that have
   wrought me in the least, but what I simply conceive as the state of
   things now to be possible and satisfactory. What would you have more
   of a soldier than to run away and have him cashiered as to any
   command in your garrison? The first he hath done and the second he
   must submit to. And I assure you whatsoever he was among you, he is
   here a kind of decrepit young gentleman and terribly crest-fallen."

The letter concludes thus:--

   "For I assure you they use all the civility imaginable to you, and as
   we sat there drinking a cup of sack with the General, Colonel
   Legge[141:1] chancing to be present, there were twenty good things
   said on all hands tending to the good fame, reputation, and advantage
   of the Town, an occasion that I was heartily glad of."

Corporations may not have souls to save and bodies to kill, but
evidently they have vanities to tickle.

In November 1669 the House is still busy over the accounts. Sir George
Carteret was Treasurer of the Navy. Marvell refers to him in _The Last
Instructions to a Painter_ as:--

    "Carteret the rich did the accountants guide
    And in ill English all the world defied."

The following letter of Marvell's gives an excellent account of House of
Commons business, both how it is conducted, and how often it gets
accidentally interrupted by other business unexpectedly cropping up:--

                                                 "_November 20, 1669._

   "GENTLEMEN, MY VERY WORTHY FRIENDS,--Returning after our adjournment
   to sit upon Wednesday, the House having heard what Sir G. Cartaret
   could say for himselfe, and he then commended to withdraw, after a
   considerable debate, put it to the question, whether he were guilty
   of misdemeanour upon the Commissioners first observation, the words
   of which were, That all monyes received by him out of His Majesty's
   Exchequer are by the privy seales assigned for particular services,
   but no such thing observed or specified in his payments, whereby he
   hath assumed to himselfe a liberty to make use of the King's
   treasure for other uses then is directed. The House dividing upon
   the question, the ayes went out, and wondered why they were kept out
   so extraordinary a time. The ayes proved 138 and the noes 129; and
   the reason of the long stay then appeared; the tellers for the ayes
   chanced to be very ill reckoners, so that they were forced to tell
   severall times over in the House, and when at last the tellers for
   the ayes would have agreed the noes to be 142, the noes would needs
   say that they were 143, whereupon those for the ayes would tell once
   more and then found the noes to be indeed but 129; and the ayes then
   coming in proved to be 138; whereas if the noes had been content
   with the first error of the tellers, Sir George had been quit upon
   that observation. This I have told you so minutely because it is the
   second fatall and ominous accident that hath fain out in the
   divisions about Sir G. Cartaret. Thursday was ordered for the second
   observation, the words of which are, Two hundred and thirty thousand
   seven hundred thirty and one thousand pounds thirteen shillings and
   ninepence, claimed as payd, and deposited for security of interest,
   and yet no distinct specification of time appeares either on his
   receits or payments, whereby no judgment can be made how interest
   accrues; so that we cannot yet allow the same. But this day was
   diverted and wholy taken up by a speciall report orderd by the
   Committee for the Bill of Conventicles, that the House be informed
   of severall Conventicles in Westminster which might be of dangerous
   consequences. From hence arose much discourse; also of a report that
   Ludlow was in England, that Commonwealths-men flock about the town,
   and there were meetings said to be, where they talkt of New Modells
   of Government; so that the House ordered a Committee to receive
   informations both concerning Conventicles and these other dangerous
   meetings; and then entered a resolution upon their books without
   putting it to the question, That this House will adhere to His
   Majesty, and the Government of Church and State as now established,
   against all its enemyes. Friday having bin appointed, as I told you
   in my former letter, for the House to sit in a grand Committee upon
   the motion for the King's supply, was spent wholy in debate, whether
   they should do so or no, and concluded at last in a consent, that
   the sitting in a grand Committee upon the motion for the King's
   supply should be put of till Friday next, and so it was ordered. The
   reason of which kind of proceeding, lest you should thinke to arise
   from an indisposition of the House, I shall tell you as they appeare
   to me, to have been the expectation of what Bill will come from the
   Lords in stead of that of ours which they threw out, and a desire to
   redresse and see thoroughly into the miscarriages of mony before any
   more should be granted. To-day the House hath bin upon the second
   observation, and after a debate till foure a'clock, have voted him
   guilty also of misdemeanor in that particular. The Commissioners are
   ordered to attend the House again on Munday, which is done
   constantly for the illustration of any matter in their report,
   wherein the House is not cleare. And to say the truth, the House
   receives great satisfaction from them, and shows them extraordinary
   respect. These are the things of principall notice since my last."

Carteret eventually was censured and suspended and dismissed.

The sudden incursion of religion during a financial debate is highly
characteristic of the House of Commons.

Whilst Queen Elizabeth and her advisers did succeed in making some sort
of a settlement of religion having regard to the questions of her time,
the Restoration bishops, an inferior set of men, wholly failed. The
repressive legislation that followed upon the Act of Uniformity,
succeeded in establishing and endowing (with voluntary contributions)
what is sometimes called, absurdly enough, Political Dissent. On
points, not of doctrine, but of ceremony, and of church government, one
half of the religiously-minded community were by oaths and declarations,
and by employing the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper as "a picklock to a
place," drawn out of the service of the State. Excluded from Parliament
and from all corporate bodies, from grammar-schools and universities,
English Dissent learned to live its own life, remote from the army, the
navy, and the civil service, quite outside of what perhaps may be fairly
called the main currents of the national life. Nonconformists venerated
their own divines, were reared in their own academies and colleges, read
their own books, went, when the modified law permitted it, to their own
conventicles in back streets, and made it their boast that they had
never entered their parish churches, for the upkeep of which they were
compelled to subscribe--save for the purpose of being married. The
nation suffered by reason of this complete severance. Trade excepted,
there was no community of interest between Church and Dissent. Sobriety,
gravity, a decent way of life, the sense of religious obligation (even
when united with the habit of _extempore_ prayer, and a hereditary
disrespect for bishops' aprons), are national assets, as the expression
now goes, which cannot be disregarded with impunity.

The Conventicle Act Marvell refers to was a stringent measure, imposing
pecuniary fines upon any persons of sixteen years of age or upwards who
"under pretence of religion" should be present at any meeting of more
than five persons, or more than those of the household, "in other manner
than allowed by the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England."
Heavier fines were imposed upon the preachers. The poet Waller, who was
"nursed in Parliaments," having been first returned from Amersham in
1621, made a very sensible remark on the second reading: "Let them alone
and they will preach against each other; by this Bill they will
incorporate as being all under one calamity."[145:1] But by 144 to 78
the Bill was read, though it did not become law until the following
session. An indignant Member of Parliament once told Cromwell that he
would take the "sense" of the House against some proposal. "Very well,"
said Cromwell, "you shall take the 'sense' of the House, and I will take
the 'nonsense,' and we will see who tells the most votes."

In February 1670 the king opened a new session, and in March Marvell
wrote a private letter to a relative at Bordeaux, in which he "lends his
mind out," after a fashion forbidden him in his correspondence with his
constituents:--

   "DEAR COUSIN,-- ... You know that we having voted the King, before
   Christmas, four hundred thousand pounds, and no more; and enquiring
   severely into ill management, and being ready to adjourn ourselves
   till February, his Majesty, fortified by some undertakers of the
   meanest of our House, threw up all as nothing, and prorogued us from
   the first of December till the fourteenth of February. All that
   interval there was great and numerous caballing among the courtiers.
   The King also all the while examined at council the reports from the
   Commissioners of Accounts, where they were continually
   discountenanced, and treated rather as offenders than judges. In
   this posture we met, and the King, being exceedingly necessitous for
   money, spoke to us _stylo minaci et imperatorio_; and told us the
   inconveniences which would fall on the nation by want of a supply,
   should not ly at his door; that we must not revive any discord
   betwixt the Lords and us; that he himself had examined the accounts,
   and found every penny to have been employed in the war; and he
   recommended the Scotch union. The Garroway party appeared with the
   usual vigour, but the country gentlemen appeared not in their true
   number the first day: so, for want of seven voices, the first blow
   was against them. When we began to talk of the Lords, the King sent
   for us alone, and recommended a rasure of all proceedings. The same
   thing you know that we proposed at first. We presently ordered it,
   and went to tell him so the same day, and to thank him. At coming
   down, (a pretty ridiculous thing!) Sir Thomas Clifford carryed
   Speaker and Mace, and all members there, into the King's cellar, to
   drink his health. The King sent to the Lords more peremptoryly, and
   they, with much grumbling, agreed to the rasure. When the
   Commissioners of Accounts came before us, sometimes we heard them
   _pro formâ_, but all falls to dirt. The terrible Bill against
   Conventicles is sent up to the Lords; and we and the Lords, as to
   the Scotch busyness, have desired the King to name English
   Commissioners to treat, but nothing they do to be valid, but on a
   report to Parliament, and an act to confirm. We are now, as we
   think, within a week of rising. They are making mighty alterations
   in the Conventicle Bill (which, as we sent up, is the quintessence
   of arbitrary malice), and sit whole days, and yet proceed but by
   inches, and will, at the end, probably affix a Scotch clause of the
   King's power in externals. So the fate of the Bill is uncertain, but
   must probably pass, being the price of money. The King told some
   eminent citizens, who applyed to him against it, that they must
   address themselves to the Houses, that he must not disoblige his
   friends; and if it had been in the power of their friends, he had
   gone without money. There is a Bill in the Lords to encourage people
   to buy all the King's fee-farm rents; so he is resolved once more to
   have money enough in his pocket, and live on the common for the
   future. The great Bill begun in the Lords, and which makes more ado
   than ever any Act in this Parliament did, is for enabling Lord Ros,
   long since divorced in the spiritual court, and his children
   declared illegitimate by Act of Parliament, to marry again. Anglesey
   and Ashly, who study and know their interests as well as any
   gentlemen at court, and whose sons have marryed two sisters of Ros,
   inheritrixes if he has no issue, yet they also drive on the Bill
   with the greatest vigour. The King is for the Bill: the Duke of
   York, and all the Papist Lords, and all the Bishops, except Cosins,
   Reynolds, and Wilkins, are against it. They sat all Thursday last,
   without once rising, till almost ten at night, in most solemn and
   memorable debate, whether it should be read the second time, or
   thrown out. At last, at the question, there were forty-two persons
   and six proxys against it, and forty-one persons and fifteen proxys
   for it. If it had not gone for it, the Lord Arlington had a power in
   his pocket from the King to have nulled the proxys, if it had been
   to the purpose. It was read the second time yesterday, and, on a
   long debate whether it should be committed, it went for the Bill by
   twelve odds, in persons and proxys. The Duke of York, the bishops,
   and the rest of the party, have entered their protests, on the first
   day's debate, against it. Is not this fine work? This Bill must come
   down to us. It is my opinion that Lauderdale at one ear talks to the
   King of Monmouth, and Buckingham at the other of a new Queen. It is
   also my opinion that the King was never since his coming in, nay,
   all things considered, no King since the Conquest, so absolutely
   powerful at home, as he is at the present; nor any Parliament, or
   places, so certainly and constantly supplyed with men of the same
   temper. In such a conjuncture, dear Will, what probability is there
   of my doing any thing to the purpose? The King would needs take the
   Duke of Albemarle out of his son's hand to bury him at his own
   charges. It is almost three months, and he yet lys in the dark
   unburyed, and no talk of him. He left twelve thousand pounds a year,
   and near two hundred thousand pounds in money. His wife dyed some
   twenty days after him; she layed in state, and was buryed, at her
   son's expence, in Queen Elizabeth's Chapel. And now,

        "Disce, puer, virtutem ex me verumque laborem,
         Fortunam ex aliis.

   "_March 21, 1670._"

This remarkable letter lets us into many secrets.

The Conventicle Bill is "the price of money." The king's interest in
the Roos divorce case was believed to be due to his own desire to be
quit of a barren and deserted wife.[148:1] Our most religious king had
nineteen bastards, but no lawful issue. It may seem strange that so high
a churchman as Bishop Cosin should have taken the view he did, but Cosin
had a strong dash of the layman in his constitution, and was always an
advocate of divorce, with permission to re-marry, in cases of adultery.

A further and amending Bill for rebuilding the city was before the
House--one of eighty-four clauses, "the longest Bill, perhaps, that ever
past in Parliament," says Marvell; but the Roos Divorce Bill and the
Conventicle Bill proved so exciting in the House of Lords that they had
little time for anything else. Union with Scotland, much desired by the
king, but regarded with great suspicion by all Parliamentarians, fell
flat, though Commissioners were appointed.

The Conventicle Bill passed the Lords, who tagged on to it a proviso
Marvell refers to in his next letter, which the Lower House somewhat
modified by the omission of certain words. Lord Roos was allowed to
re-marry. The big London Bill got through.

Another private letter of Marvell's, of this date, is worth reading:--

   "DEAREST WILL,--I wrote to you two letters, and payd for them from
   the posthouse here at Westminster; to which I have had no answer.
   Perhaps they miscarryed. I sent on an answer to the only letter I
   received from Bourdeaux, and having put it into Mr. Nelthorp's hand,
   I doubt not but it came to your's. To proceed. The same day (March
   26th letter) my letter bore date, there was an extraordinary thing
   done. The King, about ten o'clock, took boat, with Lauderdale only,
   and two ordinary attendants, and rowed awhile as towards the bridge,
   and soon turned back to the Parliament stairs, and so went up into
   the House of Lords, and took his seat. Almost all of them were
   amazed, but all seemed so; and the Duke of York especially was very
   much surprized. Being sat, he told them it was a privilege he
   claimed from his ancestors to be present at their deliberations.
   That therefore, they should not, for his coming, interrupt their
   debates, but proceed, and be covered. They did so. It is true that
   this has been done long ago, but it is now so old, that it is new,
   and so disused, that at any other but so bewitched a time as this,
   it would have been looked on as an high usurpation, and breach of
   privilege. He indeed sat still, for the most part, and interposed
   very little; sometimes a word or two. But the most discerning
   opinion was, that he did herein as he rowed for having had his face
   first to the Conventicle Bill, he turned short to the Lord Ross's.
   So that, indeed, it is credible, the King, in prospect of diminishing
   the Duke of York's influence in the Lord's House, in this, or any
   future matter, resolved, and wisely enough at present, to weigh up
   and lighten the Duke's efficacy, by coming himself in person. After
   three or four days continuance, the Lords were very well used to the
   King's presence, and sent the Lord Steward and Lord Chamberlain, to
   him, when they might wait, as an House on him, to render their
   humble thanks for the honour he did them. The hour was appointed
   them, and they thanked him, and he took it well. So this matter, of
   such importance on all great occasions, seems riveted to them, and
   us, for the future, and to all posterity. Now the Lord Ross's Bill
   came in order to another debate, and the King present. Nevertheless
   the debate lasted an entire day; and it passed by very few voices.
   The King has ever since continued his session among them, and says
   it is better than going to a play. In this session the Lords sent
   down to us a proviso[149:1] for the King, that would have restored
   him to all civil or ecclesiastical prerogatives which his ancestors
   had enjoyed at any time since the Conquest. There was never so
   compendious a piece of absolute universal tyranny. But the Commons
   made them ashamed of it, and retrenched it. The Parliament was never
   embarrassed, beyond recovery. We are all venal cowards, except some
   few. What plots of State will go on this interval I know not. There
   is a new set of justices of peace framing through the whole kingdom.
   The governing cabal, since Ross's busyness, are Buckingham,
   Lauderdale, Ashly, Orrery, and Trevor. Not but the other cabal too
   have seemingly sometimes their turn. Madam,[150:1] our King's
   sister, during the King of France's progress in Flanders, is to come
   as far as Canterbury. There will doubtless be family counsels then.
   Some talk of a French Queen to be then invented for our King. Some
   talk of a sister of Denmark; others of a good virtuous Protestant
   here at home. The King disavows it; yet he has sayed in publick, he
   knew not why a woman may not be divorced for barrenness, as a man
   for impotency. The Lord Barclay went on Monday last for Ireland, the
   King to Newmarket. God keep, and increase you, in all
   things.--Yours, etc.

   "_April 14, 1670._"


FOOTNOTES:

[77:1] Clarendon's _Life_, vol. ii. p. 442.

[79:1] The clerks, however, only _counted_ the members who voted, and
kept no record of their _names_. Mr. Gladstone remembered the alteration
being made in 1836, and how unpopular it was. The change was a greater
revolution than the Reform Bill. See _The Unreformed House of Commons_
by Edward Posselt, vol. i. p. 587.

[79:2]

    "And a Parliament had lately met
    Without a single Bankes."--_Praed_.

[82:1] See Dr. Halley's _Lancashire--its Puritanism and Nonconformity_,
vol. ii. pp. 1-140, a most informing book.

[88:1] Clarendon's _History_, vol. vi. p. 249.

[90:1] An Historical Poem.--Grosart, vol. i. p. 343.

[92:1] Macaulay's _History_, vol. i. p. 154.

[95:1] I am acquainted with the romantic story which would have us
believe that Lady Fauconberg, foretelling the time to come, had caused
some other body than her father's to be buried in the Abbey (see _Notes
and Queries_, 5th October 1878, and Waylen's _House of Cromwell_, p.
341).

[96:1] See _The Unreformed House of Commons_, by Edward Porritt, vol. i.
p. 51. Marvell's old enemy, Parker, Bishop of Oxford, in his _History of
his own Time_, composed after Marvell's death, reviles his dead
antagonist for having taken this payment which, the bishop says, was
made by a custom which "had a long time been antiquated and out of
date." "Gentlemen," says the bishop, "despised so vile a stipend," yet
Marvell required it "for the sake of a bare subsistence, although in
this mean poverty he was nevertheless haughty and insolent." In Parker's
opinion poor men should be humble.

[98:1] _Parliamentary History_, vol. iv., App. No. III.

[104:1] Mr. Gladstone's testimony is that no real improvement was
effected until within the period of his own memory. 'Our services were
probably without a parallel in the world for their debasement.' (See
_Gleanings_, vi. p. 119.)

[106:1] There is a copy in the library of the _Athenæum_, London: "A
Relation of Three Embassies from his sacred Majestie Charles II. to the
Great Duke of Muscovie, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark.
Performed by the Right Ho^ble the Earle of Carlisle in the Years 1663
and 1664. Written by an Attendant on the Embassies, and published with
his Lordship's approbation. London. Printed for John Starkie at the
Miter in Fleet Street, near Temple Barr, 1669."

[109:1] "I have mentioned the dignity of his manners.... He was at his
very best on occasion of Durbars, investitures, and the like.... It
irritated him to see men giggling or jeering instead of acting their
parts properly."--_Life of Lord Dufferin_, vol. ii. p. 317.

[116:1] _Hist. MSS. Com., Portland Papers_, vol. iii. p. 296.

[116:2] See above, vol. iii. p. 294.

[118:1] Sir Walter Besant doubted this. See his _London_.

[123:1] Mr. Goldwin Smith says this was the first pitched battle between
Protection and Free Trade in England.--_The United Kingdom_, vol. ii. p.
25.

[126:1] Being curious to discover whether no "property" man raised his
voice against these measures, I turned to that true "home of lost
causes," the Protests of the House of Lords; and there, sure enough, I
found one solitary peer, Henry Carey, Earl of Dover, entering his
dissent to both Bills--to the Judicature Bill because of the unlimited
power given to the judges, to the Rebuilding Bill because of the
exorbitant powers entrusted to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen to give away
or dispose of the property of landlords.

[128:1] Clarendon's _Life_, vol. iii. p. 796.

[129:1] Clarendon's _Life_, vol. iii. p. 798.

[129:2] "Instructions to a Painter for the drawing of the Posture and
Progress of His Majesty's forces at Sea under the command of His
Highness Royal: together with the Battel and Victory obtained over the
Dutch, June 3, 1665."--Waller's _Works_, 1730, p. 161.

[130:1] Sir John Denham's wife was reported to have been poisoned by a
dish of chocolate, at the bidding of the Duchess of York.

[131:1] Clarendon's eldest son.

[139:1] It is disconcerting to find Evelyn recording this, his last
visit to Clarendon, in his Diary under date of the 9th December, by
which time the late Chancellor was in Rouen. One likes notes in a diary
to be made contemporaneously and not "written-up" afterwards. Evelyn
makes the same kind of mistake about Cromwell's funeral, misdating it a
month.

[140:1] The duke died in 1670 and had a magnificent funeral on the 30th
of April. See _Hist. MSS. Com., Duke of Portland's Papers_, vol. iii. p.
314. His laundress-Duchess did not long survive him.

[141:1] Afterwards Lord Dartmouth, a great friend of James the Second,
but one who played a dubious part at the Revolution.

[145:1] The poet Waller was one of the wittiest speakers the House of
Commons has ever known.

[148:1] For a full account of this remarkable case, see Clarendon's
_Life_, iii. 733-9.

[149:1] "Provided, etc., that neither this Act nor anything therein
contained shall extend to invalidate or avoid his Majesty's supremacy in
ecclesiastical affairs [or to destroy any of his Majesty's rights powers
or prerogatives belonging to the Imperial Crown of this realm or at any
time exercised by himself or any of his predecessors Kings or Queens of
England] but that his Majesty his heirs and successors may from time to
time and at all times hereafter exercise and enjoy all such powers and
authorities aforesaid as fully and amply as himself or any of his
predecessors have or might have done the same anything in this Act (or
any other law statute or usage to the contrary) notwithstanding." The
words in brackets were rejected by the Commons. See _Parliamentary
History_, iv. 446-7.

[150:1] Madame's business is now well known. The secret Treaty of Dover
was the result of this visit.




CHAPTER V

"THE REHEARSAL TRANSPROSED"


It is never easy for ecclesiastical controversy to force its way into
literature. The importance of the theme will be questioned by few. The
ability displayed in its illumination can be denied by none. It is the
temper that usually spoils all. A collection in any way approaching
completeness, of the pamphlets this contention has produced in England,
would contain tens of thousands of volumes; full of curious learning and
anecdotes, of wide reading and conjecture, of shrewdness and wit; yet
these books are certainly the last we would seek to save from fire or
water. Could they be piled into scales of moral measurement a single
copy of the _Imitatio_, of the _Holy Dying_, of the _Saint's Rest_,
would outweigh them all. Man may not be a religious animal, but he
recognises and venerates the spirit of religion whenever he perceives
it, and it is a spirit which is apt to evaporate amidst the strife of
rival wits. Who can doubt the sincerity of Milton, when he exclaimed
with the sad prophet Jeremy, "Woe is me my Mother that thou hast borne
me a man of strife and contention."

Marvell's chief prose work, the two parts of _The Rehearsal
Transprosed_, is a very long pamphlet indeed, composed by way of reply
to certain publications of Samuel Parker, afterwards Bishop of Oxford.
Controversially Marvell's book was a great success.[152:1] It amused the
king, delighted the wits, was welcomed, if not read, by the pious folk
whose side it espoused, whilst its literary excellence was sufficient to
win, in after years, the critical approval of Swift, whose style, though
emphatically his own, bears traces of its master having given, I will
not say his days and nights, but certainly some profitable hours, to the
study of Marvell's prose.

Biographers of controversialists seldom do justice to the other side.
Possibly they do not read it, and Parker has been severely handled by my
predecessors. He was not an honour to his profession, being, perhaps, as
good or as bad a representative of the seamy side of State Churchism as
there is to be found. He was the son of a Puritan father, and whilst at
Wadham lived by rule, fasting and praying. He took his degree in the
early part of 1659, and migrating to Trinity came under the influence of
Dr. Bathurst, then Senior Fellow, to whom, so he says in one of his
dedications, "I owe my first rescue from the chains and fetters of an
unhappy education."[152:2] Anything Parker did he did completely, and
we next hear of him in London in 1665, a nobleman's chaplain, setting
the table in a roar by making fun of his former friends, "a mimical way
of drolling upon the puritans." "He followed the town-life, haunted the
best companies and, to polish himself from any pedantic roughness, he
read and saw the plays with much care and more preparing than most of
the auditory." In 1667 the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Sheldon, a very
mundane person indeed, made Parker his chaplain, and three years later
Archdeacon of Canterbury. He reached many preferments, so that, says
Marvell, "his head swell'd like any bladder with wind and vapour." He
had an active pen and a considerable range of subject. In 1670 he
produced "A Discourse of Ecclesiastical Politie wherein the Authority of
the Civil Magistrate over the Consciences of Subjects in Matters of
External Religion is Asserted; The Mischiefs and Inconveniences of
Toleration are represented and all Pretenses pleaded in behalf of
_Liberty of Conscience_ are fully answered." Some one instantly took up
the cudgels in a pamphlet entitled _Insolence and Impudence Triumphant_,
and the famous Dr. Owen also protested in _Truth and Innocence
Vindicated_. Parker replied to Owen in _A Defence and Continuation of
Ecclesiastical Politie_, and in the following year, 1672, reprinted a
treatise of Bishop Bramholl's with a preface "shewing what grounds there
are of Fears and Jealousies of Popery."

This was the state of the controversy when Marvell entered upon it with
his _Rehearsal Transprosed_, a fantastic title he borrowed for no very
good reasons from the farce of the hour, and a very good farce too, the
Duke of Buckingham's _Rehearsal_, which was performed for the first time
at the Theatre Royal on the 7th of November 1671, and printed early in
1672. Most of us have read Sheridan's _Critic_ before we read
Buckingham's _Rehearsal_, which is not the way to do justice to the
earlier piece. It is a matter of literary tradition that the duke had
much help in the composition of a farce it took ten years to make.
Butler, Sprat, and Clifford, the Master of Charterhouse, are said to be
co-authors. However this may be, the piece was a great success, and both
Marvell and Parker, I have no doubt, greatly enjoyed it, but I cannot
think the former was wise to stuff his plea for Liberty of Conscience so
full as he did with the details of a farce. His doing so should, at all
events, acquit him of the charge of being a sour Puritan. In the
_Rehearsal_ Bayes (Dryden), who is turned by Sheridan in his adaptation
of the piece into Mr. Puff, is made to produce out of his pocket his
book of _Drama Commonplaces_, and the play proceeds (_Johnson_ and
_Smith_ being _Sheridan's_ Dangle and Sneer):

   "_Johnson._ _Drama Commonplaces_! pray what's that?

   _Bayes._ Why, Sir, some certain helps, that we men of Art have found
      it convenient to make use of.

   _Johnson._ How, Sir, help for Wit?

   _Bayes._ I, Sir, that's my position. And I do here averr, that no man
      yet the Sun e'er shone upon, has parts sufficient to furnish out a
      Stage, except it be with the help of these my rules.

   _Johnson._ What are those Rules, I pray?

   _Bayes._ Why, Sir, my first Rule is the Rule of Transversion, or
      _Regula Duplex_, changing Verse into Prose, or Prose into Verse,
      _alternative_ as you please.

   _Smith._ How's that, Sir, by a Rule, I pray?

   _Bayes._ Why, thus, Sir; nothing more easy when understood: I take a
      Book in my hand, either at home, or elsewhere, for that's all one,
      if there be any Wit in 't, as there is no Book but has some, I
      Transverse it; that is, if it be Prose, put it into Verse (but
      that takes up some time), if it be Verse, put it into Prose.

   _Johnson._ Methinks, Mr. _Bayes_, that putting Verse into Prose
      should be called Transprosing.

   _Bayes_. By my troth, a very good Notion, and hereafter it shall be
      so."

Marvell must be taken to have meant by his title that he saw some
resemblance between Parker and Bayes, and, indeed, he says he does, and
gives that as one of his excuses for calling Parker Bayes all through:--

   "But before I commit myself to the dangerous depths of his Discourse
   which I am now upon the brink of, I would with his leave, make a
   motion; that instead of Author I may henceforth indifferently well
   call him Mr. Bayes as oft as I shall see occasion. And that first
   because he has no name, or at least will not own it, though he
   himself writes under the greatest security, and gives us the first
   letters of other men's names before he be asked them. Secondly,
   because he is, I perceive, a lover of elegancy of style and can
   endure no man's tautologies but his own; and therefore I would not
   distaste him with too frequent repetition of one word. But chiefly
   because Mr. Bayes and he do very much symbolise, in their
   understandings, in their expressions, in their humour, in their
   contempt and quarrelling of all others, though of their own
   profession."

But justice must be done even to Parker before handing him over to the
Tormentor. What were his positions? He was a coarse-fibred, essentially
irreligious fellow, the accredited author of the reply to the question
"What is the best body of Divinity?" "That which would help a man to
keep a Coach and six horses," but he is a lucid and vigorous writer,
knowing very well that he had to steer his ship through a narrow and
dangerous channel, avoiding Hobbism on the one side and tender
consciences on the other. Each generation of State Churchmen has the
same task. The channel remains to-day just as it ever did, with Scylla
and Charybdis presiding over their rocks as of old. Hobbes's _Leviathan_
appeared in 1651, and in 1670 both his philosophy and his statecraft
were fashionable doctrine. All really pious people called Hobbes an
Atheist. Technically he was nothing of the sort, but it matters little
what he was technically, since no plain man who can read can doubt that
Hobbes's enthronement of the State was the dethronement of God:--

   "Seeing then that in every Christian commonwealth the civil sovereign
   is the supreme factor to whose charge the whole flock of his subjects
   is commuted, and consequently that it is by his authority that all
   other pastors are made and have power to teach and perform all other
   pastoral offices, it followeth also that it is from the civil
   sovereign that all other pastors derive their right of teaching,
   preaching and other functions pertaining to that office, and that
   they are but his ministers in the same way as the magistrates of
   towns, judges in Court of Justice and commanders of assizes are all
   but ministers of him that is the magistrate of the whole
   commonwealth, judge of all causes and commander of the whole militia,
   which is always the Civil Sovereign. And the reason hereof is not
   because they that teach, but because they that are to learn, are his
   subjects."--(_The Leviathan_, Hobbes's _English Works_ (Molesworth's
   Edition), vol. iii. p. 539.)

Hobbes shirks nothing, and asks himself the question, What if a king, or
a senate or other sovereign person forbid us to believe in Christ? The
answer given is, "such forbidding is of no effect; because belief and
unbelief never follow men's commands." But suppose "we be commanded by
our lawful prince to say with our tongue we believe not, must we obey
such command?" Here Hobbes a little hesitates to say outright "Yes, you
must"; but he does say "whatsoever a subject is compelled to do in
obedience to his own Sovereign, and doth it not in order to his own
mind, but in order to the laws of his country, that action is not his,
but his Sovereign's--nor is it that he in this case denieth Christ
before men, but his Governor and the law of his country." Hobbes then
puts the case of a Mahomedan subject of a Christian Commonwealth who is
required under pain of death to be present at the Divine Service of the
Christian Church--what is he to do? If, says Hobbes, you say he ought
to die, then you authorise all private men to disobey their princes in
maintenance of their religion, true or false, and if you say the
Mahomedan ought to obey, you admit Hobbes's proposition and ought to
consent to be yourself bound by it. (See Hobbes's _English Works_, iii.
493.)

The Church of England, though anxious both to support the king and
suppress the Dissenters, could not stomach Hobbes; but if it could not,
how was it to deal with Hobbes's question, "if it is _ever_ right to
disobey your lawful prince, who is to determine _when_ it is right?"

Parker seeks to grapple with this difficulty. He disowns Hobbes.

   "When men have once swallowed this principle, that Mankind is free
   from all obligations antecedent to the laws of the Commonwealth, and
   that the Will of the Sovereign Power is the only measure of Good and
   Evil, they proceed suitably to its consequences to believe that no
   Religion can obtain the force of law till it is established as such
   by supreme authority, that the Holy Scriptures were not laws to any
   man till they were enjoyn'd by the Christian Magistrate, and that if
   the Sovereign Power would declare the Alcoran to be Canonical
   Scripture, it would be as much the Word of God as the Four Gospels.
   (See _Hobbes_, vol. iii. p. 366.) So that all Religions are in
   reality nothing but Cheats and impostures to awe the common people to
   obedience. And therefore although Princes may wisely make use of the
   foibles of Religion to serve their own turns upon the silly
   multitude, yet 'tis below their wisdom to be seriously concerned
   themselves for such fooleries." (Parker's _Ecc. Politie_, p. 137.)

As against this fashionable Hobbism, Parker pleads Conscience.

   "When anything that is apparently and intrinsically evil is the
   Matter of a Human Law, whether it be of a Civil or Ecclesiastical
   concern, here God is to be obeyed rather than Man."

He forcibly adds:--

   "Those who would take off from the Consciences of Men all obligations
   antecedent to those of Human Laws, instead of making the power of
   Princes Supreme, Absolute and Uncontrollable, they utterly enervate
   all their authority, and set their subjects at perfect liberty from
   all their commands. For if we once remove all the antecedent
   obligations of Conscience and Religion, Men will no further be bound
   to submit to their laws than only as themselves shall see convenient,
   and if they are under no other restraint it will be their wisdom to
   rebel as oft as it is their interest." (_Ecc. Politie_, pp. 112-113.)

But though when dealing with Hobbes, Parker thinks fit to assert the
claims of conscience so strongly, when he has to grapple with those who,
like the immortal author of _The Pilgrim's Progress_, "devilishly and
perniciously abstained from coming to Church," and upheld "unlawful
Meetings and Conventicles," his tone alters, and it is hard to
distinguish his position from that of the philosopher of Malmesbury.

Parker's argument briefly stated, and as much as possible in his own
vigorous language, comes to this:

There is and always must be a competition between the prerogative of
the Prince or State and that of Conscience, which on this occasion is
defined as "every private man's own judgment and persuasion of things."
"Do subjects rebel against their Sovereign? 'Tis Conscience that takes
up arms. Do they murder Kings? 'Tis under the conduct of Conscience. Do
they separate from the communion of the Church? 'Tis Conscience that is
the Schismatick. Everything that a man has a mind to is his Conscience."
(_Ecc. Politie_, p. 6.)

How is this competition to be resolved? Parker answers in exact language
which would have met with John Austin's warm approval.

   "The Supreme Government of every Commonwealth, wherever it is lodged,
   must of necessity be universal, absolute and uncontrollable. For if
   it be limited, it may be controlled, but 'tis a thick and palpable
   contradiction to call such a power supreme in that whatever controls
   it must as to that case be its Superior. And therefore affairs of
   Religion being so strongly influential upon affairs of State, they
   must be as uncontrollably subject to the Supreme Power as all other
   Civil concerns." (_Ecc. Politie_, p. 27.)

If the magistrate may make penal laws against swearing and blasphemy,
why not as to rites and ceremonies of public worship? (39.) Devotion
towards God is a virtue akin to gratitude to man; religion is a branch
of morality. The Puritans' talk about grace is a mere imposture, (76)
which extracts from Parker vehement language. What is there to make such
a fuss about? he cries. Why cannot you come to Church? You are left free
to _think_ what you like. Your secret thoughts are your own, but living
as you do in society, and knowing as you must how, unless the law
interferes, "every opinion must make a sect, and every sect a faction,
and every faction when it is able, a war, and every war is the cause of
God, and the cause of God can never be prosecuted with too much
violence" (16), why cannot you conform to a form of worship which,
though it does not profess to be prescribed in all particulars, contains
nothing actually forbidden in the Scriptures? What authority have
Dissenters for singing psalms in metre? "Where has our Saviour or his
Apostles enjoined a directory for public worship? What Scripture command
is there for the _three_ significant ceremonies of the Solemn League and
Covenant, viz. that the whole congregation should take it (1) uncovered,
(2) standing, (3) with their right hand lift up bare" (184), and so on.

In answer to the objection that the civil magistrate might establish a
worship in its own nature sinful and sensual, Parker replies it is not
in the least likely, and the risk must be run. "Our enquiry is to find
out the best way of settling the world that the state of things admit
of--if indeed mankind were infallible, this controversy were at an end,
but seeing that all men are liable to errors and mistakes, and seeing
that there is an absolute necessity of a supreme power in all public
affairs, our question (I say) is, What is the most prudent and expedient
way of settling them, not that possibly might be, but that really is.
And this (as I have already sufficiently proved) is to devolve their
management on the supreme civil power which, though it may be imperfect
and liable to errors and mistakes, yet 'tis the least so, and is a much
better way to attain public peace and tranquillity than if they were
left to the ignorance and folly of every private man" (212).

I now feel that at least I have done Parker full justice, but as so far
I have hardly given an example of his familiar style, I must find room
for two or three final quotations. The thing Parker hated most in the
world was a _Tender Conscience_. He protests against the weakness which
is content with passing penal laws, but does not see them carried out
for fear of wounding these trumpery tender consciences. "Most men's
minds or consciences are weak, silly and ignorant things, acted by fond
and absurd principles and imposed upon by their vices and their
passions." (7.) "However, if the obligation of laws must yield to that
of a tender conscience, how impregnably is every man that has a mind to
disobey armed against all the commands of his superiors. No authority
shall be able to govern him farther than he himself pleases, and if he
dislike the law he is sufficiently excused (268). A weak conscience is
the product of a weak understanding, and he is a very subtil man that
can find the difference between a tender head and a tender conscience
(269). It is a glorious thing to suffer for a tender conscience, and
therefore it is easy and natural for some people to affect some little
scruples against the commands of authority, thereby to make themselves
obnoxious to some little penalties, and then what godly men are they
that are so ready to be punished for a good conscience" (278). "The
voice of the publick law cannot but drown the uncertain whispers of a
tender conscience; all its scruples are hushed and silenced by the
commands of authority. It dares not whimper when that forbids, and the
nod of a prince awes it into silence and submission. But if they dare to
murmur, and their proud stomachs will swell against the rebukes of their
superiors, then there is no remedy but the rod and correction. They must
be chastised out of their peevishness and lashed into obedience (305).
The doctor concludes his treatise with the words always dear to men of
fluctuating opinions, 'What I have written, I have written'" (326).

Whilst Parker was writing this book in his snug quarters in the
Archbishop's palace at Lambeth, Bunyan was in prison in Bedford for
refusing to take the communion on his knees in his parish church; and
Dr. Manton, who had been offered the Deanery of Rochester, was in the
Gate House Prison under the Five Mile Act.

The first part of _The Rehearsal Transprosed_, though its sub-title is
"Animadversions upon a late book intituled a Preface shewing what
grounds there are of Fears and Jealousies of Popery," deals after
Marvell's own fashion with all three of Parker's books, the
_Ecclesiastical Politie_, the _Bramhall Preface_, and the _Defence of
the Ecclesiastical Politie_. It is by no means so easy to give a fair
notion of the _Rehearsal Transprosed_ in a short compass, as it was of
Parker's line of argument. The parson wrote more closely than the Member
of Parliament. I cannot give a better description of Marvell's method
than in Parker's own words in his preface to his _Reproof to the
Rehearsal Transprosed_, which appeared in 1673 and gave rise to
Marvell's second part:--

   "When," writes Parker, "I first condemned myself to the drudgery of
   this Reply, I intended nothing but a serious prosecution of my
   Argument, and to let the World see that it is not reading Histories
   or Plays or Gazettes, nor going on pilgrimage to Geneva, nor learning
   French and Italian, nor passing the Alps, nor being a cunning
   Gamester that can qualify a man to discourse of Conscience and
   Ecclesiastical Policy; in that it is not capping our Argument with a
   story that will answer it, nor clapping an apothegm upon an assertion
   that will prove it, nor stringing up Proverbs and Similitudes upon
   one another that will make up a Coherent Discourse."

Allowing for bias this is no unfair account of Marvell's method, and it
was just because this was Marvell's method that he succeeded so well in
amusing the king and in pleasing the town, and that he may still be read
by those who love reading with a fair measure of interest and enjoyment.

Witty and humorous men are always at a disadvantage except on the stage.
The hum-drum is the style for Englishmen. Bishop Burnet calls Marvell "a
droll," Parker, who was to be a bishop, calls him "a buffoon." Marvell
is occasionally humorous and not infrequently carries a jest beyond the
limits of becoming mirth; but he is more often grave. Yet when he is,
his gravity was treated either as one of his feebler jokes or as an
impertinence. But as it is his wit alone that has kept him alive he need
not be pitied overmuch.

The substance of Marvell's reply to Parker, apart altogether from its
by-play, is to be found in passages like the following:--

   "Here it is that after so great an excess of wit, he thinks fit to
   take a julep and re-settle his brain and the government. He grows as
   serious as 'tis possible for a madman, and pretends to sum-up the
   whole state of the controversy with the Nonconformists. And to be
   sure he will make the story as plausible for himself as he may; but
   therefore it was that I have before so particularly quoted and bound
   him up with his own words as fast as such a Proteus could be
   pinion'd. For he is as waxen as the first matter, and no form comes
   amiss to him. Every change of posture does either alter his opinion
   or vary the expression by which we should judge of it; and sitting he
   is of one mind, and standing of another. Therefore I take myself the
   less concern'd to fight with a windmill like Quixote; or to whip a
   gig as boyes do; or with the lacqueys at Charing-Cross or
   Lincoln's-Inn-Fields to play at the Wheel of Fortune; lest I should
   fall into the hands of my Lord Chief-Justice, or Sir Edmond Godfrey.
   The truth is, in short, and let Bayes make more or less of it if he
   can, Bayes had at first built-up such a stupendous magistrate as
   never was of God's making. He had put all princes upon the rack to
   stretch them to his dimension. And as a straight line continued grows
   a circle, he had given them so infinite a power, that it was extended
   unto impotency. For though he found it not till it was too late in
   the cause, yet he felt it all along (which is the understanding of
   brutes) in the effect. For hence it is that he so often complains
   that princes know not aright that supremacy over consciences, to
   which they were so lately, since their deserting the Church of Rome,
   restored; that in most Nations government was not rightly understood,
   and many expressions of that nature: whereas indeed the matter is,
   that princes have always found that uncontroulable government over
   _conscience_ to be both unsafe and impracticable. He had run himself
   here to a stand, and perceived that there was a God, there was
   Scripture; the magistrate himself had a conscience, and must 'take
   care that he did not enjoyn things apparently evil.' But after all,
   he finds himself again at the same stand here, and is run up to the
   wall by an angel. God, and Scripture, and conscience will not let him
   go further; but he owns, that if the magistrate enjoyns things
   apparently evil, the subject may have liberty to remonstrate. What
   shall he do, then? for it is too glorious an enterprize to be
   abandoned at the first rebuffe. Why, he gives us a new translation of
   the Bible, and a new commentary! He saith, that tenderness of
   conscience might be allowed in a Church to be constituted, not in a
   Church constituted already. That tenderness of conscience and scandal
   are ignorance, pride, and obstinacy. He saith, the Nonconformists
   should communicate with him till they have clear evidence that it is
   evil. This is a civil way indeed of gaining the question, to perswade
   men that are unsatisfied, to be satisfied till they be dissatisfied.
   He threatens, he rails, he jeers them, if it were possible, out of
   all their consciences and honesty; and finding that will not do, he
   calls out the magistrate, tells him these men are not fit to live;
   there can be no security of government while they are in being. Bring
   out the pillories, whipping-posts, gallies (=galleys), rods, and
   axes (which are _ratio ultima cleri_, a clergyman's last argument, ay
   and his first too), and pull in pieces all the Trading Corporations,
   those nests of Faction and Sedition. This is a faithful account of
   the sum and intention of all his undertaking, for which, I confess,
   he was as pick'd a man as could have been employed or found out in a
   whole kingdome; but it is so much too hard a task for any man to
   atchieve, that no goose but would grow giddy with it."[165:1]

In reply to what Parker had written about the unreasonable fuss made by
the Dissenters over the "two or three symbolical ceremonies" called
sacraments, Marvell says:--

   "They (the Nonconformists) complain that these things should be
   imposed on them with so high a penalty as want nothing of a
   sacramental nature but divine institution. And because a human
   institution is herein made of equal force to a divine institution
   therefore it is that they are aggrieved.... For without the sign of
   the Cross our Church will not receive any one in Baptism; as also
   without kneeling no man is suffered to come to the Communion.... But
   here, I say, then is their (the Nonconformists') main exception that
   things indifferent and that have no proper signature or significancy
   to that purpose should by command be made conditions of
   Church-communion. I have many times wished for peaceableness' sake
   that they had a greater latitude, but if, unless they should stretch
   their consciences till they tear again, they cannot conform, what
   remedy? For I must confess that Christians have a better right and
   title to the Church and to the ordinances of God there, than the
   Author hath to his surplice.... Bishop Bramhall saith, 'I do profess
   to all the world that the transforming of indifferent opinions into
   necessary articles of faith hath been that _insana laurus_ or cursed
   bay tree, the cause of all our brawling and contention.' That which
   he saw in matter of doctrine, he would not discern in discipline....
   It is true and very piously done that our Church doth declare that
   the kneeling at the Lord's Supper is not enjoined for adoration of
   those elements and concerning the other ceremonies as before. But
   the Romanists (from whom we have them and who said of old we would
   come to feed on their meat as well as eat of their porridge) do offer
   us here many a fair declaration and distinction in very weighty
   matters to which nevertheless the conscience of our Church hath not
   complyed. But in this particular matter of kneeling which came in
   first with the doctrine of transubstantiation, the Romish Church do
   reproach us with flat idolatry, in that we, not believing the real
   presence in the bread and wine, yet do pay to something or other the
   same adoration. Suppose the ancient pagans had declared to the
   primitive Christians that the offerings of some grains of incense was
   only to perfume the room--do you think the Christians would have
   palliated so far and colluded with their consciences? Therefore
   although the Church do consider herself so much as not to alter her
   mode unto the fashion of others, yet I cannot see why she ought to
   exclude those from communion whose weaker consciences cannot, for
   fear of scandal, step further."[166:1]

With Parker's thunders and threats of the authority of princes and
states, Marvell deals more in the mood of a statesman than of a
philosopher, more as a man of affairs than as a jurist. He deplores the
ferocity of Parker's tone and that of a certain number of the clergy.

   "Why is it," he asks, "that this kind of clergy should always be and
   have been for the most precipitate, brutish, and sanguinary counsels?
   The former Civil War cannot make them wise, nor his Majesty's happy
   return good-natured, but they are still for running things up unto
   the same extremes. The softness of the Universities where they have
   been bred, the gentleness of Christianity, in which they have been
   nurtured, hath but exasperated their nature, and they seem to have
   contracted no idea of wisdom but what they learnt at school--the
   pedantry of Whipping. For whether it be or no that the clergy are not
   so well fitted by education as others for political affairs I know
   not, though I should rather think they have advantage above others,
   and even if they would but keep to their Bibles, might make the best
   Ministers of State in the world; yet it is generally observed that
   things miscarry under their government. If there be any council more
   precipitate, more violent, more extreme than other, it is theirs.
   Truly, I think the reason that God does not bless them in affairs of
   State is because he never intended them for that employment."[167:1]

Of Archbishop Laud and Charles the First, Marvell says:--

   "I am confident the Bishop studied to do both God and his Majesty
   good service; but alas, how utterly was he mistaken. Though so
   learned, so pious, so wise a man, he seem'd to know nothing beyond
   Ceremonies, Armenianism, and Mainwaring. With that he begun, with
   that ended, and thereby deform'd the whole reign of the best prince
   that ever wielded the English sceptre. For his late Majesty, being a
   prince truly pious and religious, was therefore the more inclined to
   esteem and favour the clergy. And thence, though himself of a most
   exquisite understanding, yet he could not trust it better than in
   their treatment. Whereas every man is best at his own post, and so
   the preacher in the pulpit."[167:2]

Kings, Marvell points out to Parker, must take wider views than parsons.

   "'Tis not with them as with you. You have but one cure of souls, or
   perhaps two as being a nobleman's chaplain, to look after, and if you
   made conscience of discharging them as you ought, you would find you
   had work sufficient without writing your 'Ecclesiastical Policies.'
   But they are the incumbents of whole kingdoms, and the rectorship of
   the common people, the nobility, and even of the clergy. The care I
   say of all this rests on them, so that they are fain to condescend to
   many things for peace sake and the quiet of mankind that your proud
   heart would break before it would bend to. They do not think fit to
   require any thing that is impossible, unnecessary or wanton of their
   people, but are fain to consider the very temper of the climate in
   which they live, the constitution and laws under which they have been
   formerly bred, and upon all occasions to give them good words and
   humour them like children. They reflect upon the histories of former
   times and the present transactions to regulate themselves by in every
   circumstance.... They (Kings) do not think fit to command things
   unnecessary."[168:1]

These extracts, however fatal to Marvell's traditional reputation in the
eighteenth century as a Puritan and a Republican, call for no apology.

An example of Marvell's Interludes ought to be given. There are many to
choose from.

   "There was a worthy divine, not many years dead, who in his younger
   time, being of a facetious and unlucky humour, was commonly known by
   the name of Tom Triplet; he was brought up at Paul's school under a
   severe master, Dr. Gill, and from thence he went to the University.
   There he took liberty (as 'tis usual with those that are emancipated
   from School) to tel tales and make the discipline ridiculous under
   which he was bred. But not suspecting the doctor's intelligence,
   coming once to town he went in full school to give him a visite and
   expected no less than to get a play day for his former acquaintances.
   But instead of that he found himself hors'd up in a trice, though he
   appeal'd in vain to the priviledges of the University, pleaded
   _adultus_ and invoked the mercy of the spectators. Nor was he let
   down till the master had planted a grove of birch in his back-side
   for the terrour and publick example of all waggs that divulge the
   secrets of Priscian and make merry with their teachers. This stuck so
   with Triplet that all his life-time he never forgave the doctor, but
   sent him every New Year's tide an anniversary ballad to a new tune,
   and so in his turn avenged himself of his jerking pedagogue."[168:2]

Marvell's game of picquet with a parson plays such a part in Parker's
_Reproof_ to the _Rehearsal Transprosed_ that it deserves to be
mentioned:--

   "'Tis not very many years ago that I used to play at picket; there
   was a gentleman of your robe, a dignitory of Lincoln, very well
   known and remembered in the ordinaries, but being not long since
   dead, I will save his name. Now I used to play pieces, and this
   gentleman would always go half-a-crown with me; and so all the while
   he sate on my hand he very honestly '_gave the sign_' so that I was
   always sure to lose. I afterwards discovered it, but of all the money
   that ever I was cheated of in my life, none ever vexed me so as what
   I lost by his occasion."[169:1]

There is no need to pursue the controversy further. It is still
unsettled.

Parker's _Reproof_, published in 1673, is less argumentative and
naturally enough more personal than the _Ecclesiastical Politie_. Any
use I now make of it will be purely biographical. Let us see Andrew
Marvell depicted by an angry parson--not in passages of mere abuse, as
_e.g._ "Thou dastard Craven, thou Swad, thou Mushroom, thou coward in
heart, word and deed, thou Judas, thou Crocodile"; for epithets such as
these are of no use to a biographer--but in places where Marvell is at
least made to sit for the portrait, however ill-natured.

   "And if I would study revenge I could easily have requited you with
   the Novels of a certain Jack Gentleman, that was born of pure parents
   and bred among cabin-boys, and sent from school to the University and
   from the University to the Gaming Ordinaries, but the young man,
   being easily rooked by the old Gamesters, he was sent abroad to gain
   courage and experience, and beyond sea saw the Bears of Berne and the
   large race of Capons at Geneva, and a great many fine sights beside,
   and so returned home as accomplished as he went out, tries his
   fortune once more at the Ordinaries, plays too high for a gentleman
   of his private condition, and so is at length cheated of all at
   Picquet." ... "And now to conclude; is it not a sad thing that a
   well-bred and fashionable gentleman that has frequented Ordinaries,
   that has worn Perukes and Muffs and Pantaloons and was once Master of
   a Watch, that has travelled abroad and seen as many men and
   countries as the famous Vertuosi, Sorbier and Coriat, that has heard
   the City Lions roar, that has past the Alps and seen all the
   Tredescin rarities and old stones of Italy, that has sat in the
   Porphyric Chair at Rome, that can describe the methods of the
   Elections of Popes and tell stories of the tricks of Cardinals, that
   has been employed in Embassies abroad and acquainted with Intrigues
   of State at home, that has read Plays and Histories and Gazettes;
   that I say a Gentleman thus accomplished and embellished within and
   without and all over, should ever live to that unhappy dotage as at
   last to dishonour his grey hairs and his venerable age with such
   childish and impotent endeavours at wit and buffoonery."--(_Reproof_,
   pp. 270, 274-5.)[170:1]

Marvell was very little over fifty years of his age at this time, nor is
Parker's portrait to be regarded as truthful in any other
particular--yet something of a man's character may be discovered by
noticing the way he is abused by those who want to abuse him.

Marvell, though no orator, or even debater, was the stuff of which
controversialists are made. In a letter, printed in the Duke of
Portland's papers, and dated May 3, 1673, he writes:--

   "Dr. Parker will be out the next week. I have seen it--already three
   hundred and thirty pages and it will be much more. (It was five
   hundred twenty-eight pages.) I perceive by what I have read that it
   is the rudest book, one or other, that ever was published, I may say
   since the first invention of printing. Although it handles me so
   roughly, yet I am not at all amated by it. But I must desire the
   advice of some few friends to tell me whether it will be proper for
   me and in what way to answer it. However I will for mine own private
   satisfaction forthwith draw up an answer that shall have as much of
   spirit and solidity in it as my ability will afford and the age we
   live in will endure. I am, if I may say it with reverence, drawn in I
   hope by a good Providence to intermeddle on a noble and high
   argument. But I desire that all the discourse of my friends may run
   as if no answer ought to be expected to so scurrilous a
   book."--(_Hist. MSS. Comm., Portland Papers_, iii. 337.)

The title-page of the Second Part of the _Rehearsal Transprosed_ is a
curiosity:--

      THE
      REHEARSALL
      TRANSPROS'D:

             *       *       *       *       *

      THE SECOND PART.

             *       *       *       *       *

      Occasioned by Two Letters: The first Printed
        by a nameless Author, Intituled, A
        Reproof, etc.

      The Second Letter left for me at a Friends
        House, Dated Nov. 3, 1673. Subscribed
        J.G. and concluding with these words;
        If thou darest to Print or Publish any
        Lie or Libel against Doctor Parker, By
        the Eternal God I will cut thy Throat.

             *       *       *       *       *

      Answered by ANDREW MARVEL.

             *       *       *       *       *

      LONDON,

      Printed for Nathaniel Ponder at the Peacock
      in Chancery Lane near Fleet-Street, 1673.

The _Second Part_ is an exceedingly witty though too lengthy a
performance. Marvell's "companion picture" of Parker is full of matter,
and of the very spirit of the times. Some of it must be given:--

   "But though he came of a good mother, he had a very ill sire. He was
   a man bred toward the Law, and betook himself, as his best practice,
   to be a sub-committee-man, or, as the stile ran, one of the Assistant
   Committee in Northamptonshire. In the rapine of that employment, and
   what he got by picking the teeth of his masters, he sustain'd himself
   till he had raked together some little estate. And then, being a man
   for the purpose, and that had begun his fortune out of the
   sequestration of the estates of the King's Party, he, to perfect it
   the more, proceeded to take away their lives; not in the hot and
   military way (which diminishes always the offence), but in the cooler
   blood and sedentary execution of an High Court of Justice.
   Accordingly he was preferr'd to be one of that number that gave
   sentence against the three Lords, Capel, Holland, and Hamilton, who
   were beheaded. By this learning in the Law he became worthy of the
   degree of a serjeant, and sometimes to go the Circuit, till for
   misdemeanor he was petition'd against. But for a taste of his
   abilities, and the more to reingratiate himself, he printed, in the
   year 1650, a very remarkable Book, called 'The Government of the
   People of England, precedent and present the same. _Ad subscribentes
   confirmandum, Dubitantes informandum, Opponentes convincendum_; and
   underneath _Multa videntur quae non sunt, multa sunt quae non
   videntur_. Under that ingraven two hands joyn'd, with the motto, _Ut
   uniamur_; and beneath a sheaf of arrows, with this device, _Vis unita
   fortior_; and to conclude, _Concordia parvae res crescunt discordia
   dilabuntur_.' A most hieroglyphical title, and sufficient to have
   supplied the mantlings and atchievements of the family! By these
   parents he was sent to Oxford, with intention to breed him up to the
   ministry. There in a short time he enter'd himself into the company
   of some young students who were used to fast and pray weekly
   together; but for their refection fed sometimes on broth, from whence
   they were commonly called Grewellers; only it was observed that he
   was wont still to put more graves than all the rest in his porridge.
   And after that he pick'd acquaintance not only with the brotherhood
   at Wadham Colledge, but with the sisterhood too, at another old
   Elsibeth's, one Elizabeth Hampton's, a plain devout woman, where he
   train'd himself up in hearing their sermons and prayers, receiving
   also the Sacrament in the house, till he had gain'd such proficience,
   that he too began to exercise in that Meeting, and was esteem'd one
   of the preciousest young men in the University. But when thus, after
   several years' approbation, he was even ready to have taken the
   charge, not of an 'admiring drove or heard,' as he now calls them,
   but of a flock upon him, by great misfortune the King came in by the
   miraculous providence of God, influencing the distractions of some,
   the good affections of others, and the weariness of all towards that
   happy Restauration, after so many sufferings, to his regal crown and
   dignity. Nevertheless he broke not off yet from his former habitudes;
   and though it were now too late to obviate this inconvenience, yet he
   persisted as far as in him was--that is, by praying, caballing, and
   discoursing--to obstruct the restoring of the episcopal government,
   revenues, and authority. Insomuch that, finding himself
   discountenanced on those accounts by the then Warden of Wadham, he
   shifted colledges to Trinity, and, when there, went away without his
   degree, scrupling, forsooth, the Subscription then required. From
   thence he came to London, where he spent a considerable time in
   creeping into all corners and companies, horoscoping up and down
   concerning the duration of the Government; not considering anything
   as best, but as most lasting and most profitable. And after having
   many times cast a figure, he at last satisfyed himself that the
   Episcopal Government would endure as long as this King lived; and
   from thence forward cast about how to be admitted into the Church of
   England, and find the highway to her preferments. In order to this he
   daily enlarged, not only his conversation, but his conscience, and
   was made free of some of the town-vices; imagining, like Muleasses
   King of Tunis (for I take witness that on all occasions I treat him
   rather above his quality than otherwise), that by hiding himself
   among the onions, he should escape being traced by his perfumes.
   Ignorant and mistaken man, that thought it necessary to part with any
   virtue to get a living; or that the Church of England did not require
   and incourage more sobriety than he could ever be guilty of; whereas
   it hath alwayes been fruitful of men who, together with obedience to
   that discipline, have lived to the envy of the Nonconformists in
   their conversation, and without such could never either have been
   preserved so long, or after so long a dissipation have ever
   recover'd. But neither was this yet, in his opinion, sufficient; and
   therefore he resolv'd to try a shorter path, which some few men had
   trod not unsuccessfully; that is, to print a Book; if that would not
   do, a second; if not that, a third of an higher extraction, and so
   forward, to give experiment against their former party of a keen
   stile and a ductile judgment. His first proof-piece was in the year
   1665, the _Tentamina Physico-Theologica_; a tedious transcript of his
   common-place book, wherein there is very little of his own, but the
   arrogance and the unparalleled censoriousness that he exercises over
   all other Writers. When he had cook'd up these musty collections, he
   makes his first invitation to his 'old acquaintance' my lord
   Archbishop of Canterbury, who had never seen before nor heard of him.
   But I must confess he furbishes-up his Grace in so glorious an
   Epistle, that had not my Lord been long since proof against the most
   spiritual flattery, the Dedication only, without ever reading the
   Book, might have serv'd to have fix'd him from that instant as his
   favourite. Yet all this I perceive did not his work, but his Grace
   was so unmindful, or rather so prudent, that the gentleman thought it
   necessary to spur-up again the next year with another new Book, to
   show more plainly what he would be at. This he dedicates to Doctor
   Bathurst; and to evidence from the very Epistle that he was ready to
   renounce that very education, the civility of which he is so tender
   of as to blame me for disordering it, he picks occasion to tell him:
   'to your prevailing advice, Sir, do I owe my first rescue from the
   chains and fetters of an unhappy education.' But in the Book, which
   he calls 'A free and impartial Censure of the Platonick Philosophy'
   (censure 'tis sure to be, whatsoever he writes), he speaks out, and
   demonstrates himself ready and equipp'd to surrender not only the
   Cause, but betray his Party without making any conditions for them,
   and to appear forthwith himself in the head of the contrary interest.
   Which, supposing the dispute to be just, yet in him was so mercenary,
   that none would have descended to act his part but a divine of
   fortune. And even lawyers take themselves excused from being of
   counsel for the King himself, in a cause where they have been
   entertain'd and instructed by their client. But so flippant he was
   and forward in this book, that in despight of all chronology, he
   could introduce Plato to inveigh against Calvin, and from the
   Platoniques he could miraculously hook-in a Discourse against the
   Nonconformists. (_Cens. Plat. Phil._, pp. 26, 27, 28, etc.) After
   this feat of activity he was ready to leap over the moon; no scruple
   of conscience could stand in his way, and no preferment seemed too
   high for him; for about this time, I find that having taken a turn at
   Cambridge to qualifie himself, he was received within doors to be my
   Lord Archbishop's other chaplain, and into some degree of favour;
   which, considering the difference of their humours and ages, was
   somewhat surprizing. But whether indeed, in times of heat and
   faction, the most temperate spirits may sometimes chance to take
   delight in one that is spightful, and make some use of him; or
   whether it be that even the most grave and serious persons do for
   relaxation divert themselves willingly by whiles with a creature that
   is unlucky, inimical, and gamesome,--so it was. And thenceforward the
   nimble gentleman danced upon bell-ropes, vaulted from steeple to
   steeple, and cut capers out of one dignity to another. Having thus
   dexterously stuck his groat in Lambeth wainscot, it may easily be
   conceived he would be unwilling to lose it; and therefore he
   concern'd himself highly, and even to jealousie, in upholding now
   that palace, which, if falling, he would out of instinct be the first
   should leave it. His Majesty about that time labouring to effect his
   constant promises of Indulgence to his people, the Author therefore
   walking with his own shadow in the evening, took a great fright lest
   all were agoe. And in this conceit being resolv'd to make good his
   figure, and that one government should not last any longer than the
   other, he set himself to write those dangerous Books which I have now
   to do with; wherein he first makes all that he will to be Law, and
   then whatsoever is Law to be Divinity."[176:1]

The Second Part is not all raillery. There is much wisdom in it and a
trace of Machiavelli:--

   "But because you are subject to misconstrue even true English, I will
   explain my self as distinctly as I can, and as close as possible,
   what is mine own opinion in this matter of the magistrate and
   government; that, seeing I have blamed you where I thought you
   blame-worthy, you may have as fair hold of me too, if you can find
   where to fix your accusation.

   "The power of the magistrate does most certainly issue from the
   divine authority. The obedience due to that power is by divine
   command; and subjects are bound, both as men and as Christians, to
   obey the magistrate actively in all things where their duty to God
   intercedes not, and however passively, that is, either by leaving
   their countrey, or if they cannot do that (the magistrate, or the
   reason of their own occasions hindring them), then by suffering
   patiently at home, without giving the least publick disturbance. But
   the dispute concerning the magistrate's power ought to be
   superfluous; for that it is certainly founded upon his commission
   from God, and for the most part sufficiently fortified with all
   humane advantages. There are few soveraign princes so abridged, but
   that, if they be not contented, they may envy their own fortune. But
   the modester question (if men will needs be medling with matters
   above them) would be, how far it is advisable for a prince to exert
   and push the rigour of that power which no man can deny him; for
   princes, as they derive the right of succession from their ancestors,
   so they inherit from that ancient and illustrious extraction a
   generosity that runs in the blood above the allay of the rest of
   mankind. And being moreover at so much ease of honour and fortune,
   that they are free from the gripes of avarice and twinges of
   ambition, they are the more disposed to an universal benignity
   toward their subjects. What prince that sees so many millions of men,
   either labouring industriously toward his revenue, or adventuring
   their lives in his service, and all of them performing his commands
   with a religious obedience, but conceives at the same time a
   relenting tenderness over them, whereof others out of the narrowness
   of their minds cannot be capable? But whoever shall cast his eye
   thorow the history of all ages, will find that nothing has alwayes
   succeeded better with princes then the clemency of government; and
   that those, on the contrary, who have taken the sanguinary course,
   have been unfortunate to themselves and the people, the consequences
   not being separable. For whether that royal and magnanimous
   gentleness spring from a propensity of their nature, or be acquired
   and confirmed by good and prudent consideration, it draws along with
   it all the effects of Policy. The wealth of a shepherd depends upon
   the multitude of his flock, the goodness of their pasture, and the
   quietness of their feeding; and princes, whose dominion over mankind
   resembles in some measure that of men over other creatures, cannot
   expect any considerable increase to themselves, if by continual
   terrour they amaze, shatter, and hare their people, driving them into
   woods, and running them upon precipices. If men do but compute how
   charming an efficacy one word, and more, one good action has from a
   superior upon those under him, it can scarce be reckon'd how powerful
   a magick there is in a prince who shall, by a constant tenour of
   humanity in government, go on daily gaining upon the affections of
   his people. There is not any privilege so dear, but it may be
   extorted from subjects by good usage, and by keeping them alwayes up
   in their good humour. I will not say what one prince may compass
   within his own time, or what a second, though surely much may be
   done; but it is enough if a great and durable design be accomplish'd
   in the third life; and supposing an hereditary succession of any
   three taking up still where the other left, and dealing still in that
   fair and tender way of management, it is impossible but that, even
   without reach or intention upon the prince's part, all should fall
   into his hand, and in so short a time the very memory or thoughts of
   any such thing as publick liberty would, as it were by consent,
   expire and be for ever extinguish'd. So that whatever the power of
   the magistrate be in the institution, it is much safer for them not
   to do that with the left hand which they may do with the right, nor
   by an extraordinary, what they may effect by the ordinary, way of
   government. A prince that goes to the top of his power is like him
   that shall go to the bottom of his treasure."[178:1]

And as for the "common people" he has this to say:--

   "Yet neither do they want the use of reason, and perhaps their
   aggregated judgment discerns most truly the errours of government,
   forasmuch as they are the first, to be sure, that smart under them.
   In this only they come to be short-sighted, that though they know the
   diseases, they understand not the remedies; and though good patients,
   they are ill physicians. The magistrate only is authorized,
   qualified, and capable to make a just and effectual Reformation, and
   especially among the Ecclesiasticks. For in all experience, as far as
   I can remember, they have never been forward to save the prince that
   labour. If they had, there would have been no Wickliffe, no Husse, no
   Luther in history. Or at least, upon so notable an emergency as the
   last, the Church of Rome would then in the Council of Trent have
   thought of rectifying itself in good earnest, that it might have
   recover'd its ancient character; whereas it left the same divisions
   much wider, and the Christian people of the world to suffer,
   Protestants under Popish governors, Popish under Protestants, rather
   than let go any point of interested ambition."[178:2]


FOOTNOTES:

[152:1] "But the most virulent of all that writ against the sect was
Parker, afterwards made Bishop of Oxford by King James: who was full of
satirical vivacity and was considerably learned, but was a man of no
judgment and of as little virtue, and as to religion rather impious:
after he had for some years entertained the nation with several virulent
books writ with much life, he was attacked by the liveliest droll of the
age, who writ in a burlesque strain but with so peculiar and
entertaining a conduct that from the King down to the tradesman his
books were read with great pleasure, that not only humbled Parker but
the whole party, for the author of the _Rehearsal Transprosed_ had all
the men of wit (or as the French phrase it all the laughers) on his
side."--Burnet's _History of his Own Time_.

[152:2] See the dedication to _A Free and Impartial Censure of the
Plutonick Philosophy_, by Sam Parker, A.M., Oxford 1666. Parker was a
man of some taste, and I have in my small collection a beautifully bound
copy of this treatise presented by the author to Seth Ward, then Bishop
of Exeter, and afterwards of Salisbury.

[165:1] Grosart, vol. iii. pp. 145-8.

[166:1] Grosart, vol. iii. pp. 155-9.

[167:1] Grosart, vol. iii. pp. 170, 210-1.

[167:2] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 211.

[168:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 171.

[168:2] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 63.

[169:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 198.

[170:1] For a still more unfriendly sketch of Andrew Marvell by the same
spiteful hand, see Parker's _History of his Own Time_, a posthumous
work, first published in Latin in 1726, and in an English Translation by
_Thomas Newlin_ in 1727. This book contains an interesting enumeration
of the numerous conspiracies against the life and throne of Charles the
Second during the earlier part of his reign, a panegyric upon Archbishop
Sheldon and plentiful abuse of Andrew Marvell. Parker died in unhappy
circumstances (see Macaulay's _History_, vol. ii. p. 205), but he left
behind him a pious nonjuring son, and his grandson founded the famous
publishing firm at Oxford.

[176:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 284.

[178:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 370.

[178:2] _Ibid._, p. 382.




CHAPTER VI

LAST YEARS IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS


Marvell's last ten years in the House of Commons were made miserable by
the passionate conviction that there existed in high quarters of the
State a deep, dangerous, and well-considered plot to subvert the
Protestant faith and to destroy by armed force Parliamentary Government
in England. Marvell was not the victim of a delusion. Such a plot, plan,
or purpose undoubtedly existed, though, as it failed, it is now easy to
consider the alarm it created to have been exaggerated.

Marvell was, of all public men then living, the one most deeply imbued
with the spirit of our free constitution. Its checks and balances jumped
with his humour. His nature was without any taint of fanaticism, nor was
he anything of the doctrinaire. He was neither a Richard Baxter nor a
John Locke. He had none of the pure Erastianism of Selden, who tells us
in his inimitable, cold-blooded way that "a King is a King men have made
for their own sakes, for quietness' sake." "Just as in a family one man
is appointed to buy the meat," and that "there is no such thing as
spiritual jurisdiction; all is civil, the Church's is the same with the
Lord Mayor's. The Pope he challenges jurisdiction over all; the Bishops
they pretend to it as well as he; the Presbyterians they would have it
to themselves, but over whom is all this, the poor layman" (see Selden's
_Table Talk_).

This may be excellent good sense but it does not represent Marvell's
way of looking at things. He thought more nobly of both church and king.

In Marvell's last book, his famous pamphlet "_An Account of the Growth
of Popery and Arbitrary Government in England," printed at Amsterdam and
recommended to the reading of all English Protestants_, 1678, which made
a prodigious stir and (it is sad to think) paved the way for the "Popish
Plot," Marvell sets forth his view of our constitution in language as
lofty as it is precise. I know no passage in any of our institutional
writers of equal merit.

   "For if first we consider the State, the kings of England rule not
   upon the same terms with those of our neighbour nations, who, having
   by force or by address usurped that due share which their people had
   in the government, are now for some ages in the possession of an
   arbitrary power (which yet no prescription can make legal) and
   exercise it over their persons and estates in a most tyrannical
   manner. But here the subjects retain their proportion in the
   Legislature; the very meanest commoner of England is represented in
   Parliament, and is a party to those laws by which the Prince is sworn
   to govern himself and his people. No money is to be levied but by the
   common consent. No man is for life, limb, goods, or liberty, at the
   Sovereign's discretion: but we have the same right (modestly
   understood) in our propriety that the prince hath in his regality:
   and in all cases where the King is concerned, we have our just remedy
   as against any private person of the neighbourhood, in the Courts of
   Westminster Hall or in the High Court of Parliament. His very
   Prerogative is no more than what the Law has determined. His Broad
   Seal, which is the legitimate stamp of his pleasure, yet is no longer
   currant, than upon the trial it is found to be legal. He cannot
   commit any person by his particular warrant. He cannot himself be
   witness in any cause: the balance of publick justice being so
   delicate, that not the hand only but even the breath of the Prince
   would turn the scale. Nothing is left to the King's will, but all is
   subjected to his authority: by which means it follows that he can do
   no wrong, nor can he receive wrong; and a King of England keeping to
   these measures, may without arrogance, be said to remain the onely
   intelligent Ruler over a rational People. In recompense therefore and
   acknowledgment of so good a Government under his influence, his
   person is most sacred and inviolable; and whatsoever excesses are
   committed against so high a trust, nothing of them is imputed to him,
   as being free from the necessity or temptation; but his ministers
   only are accountable for all, and must answer it at their perils. He
   hath a vast revenue constantly arising from the hearth of the
   Householder, the sweat of the Labourer, the rent of the Farmer, the
   industry of the Merchant, and consequently out of the estate of the
   Gentleman: a large competence to defray the ordinary expense of the
   Crown, and maintain its lustre. And if any extraordinary occasion
   happen, or be but with any probable decency pretended, the whole Land
   at whatsoever season of the year does yield him a plentiful harvest.
   So forward are his people's affections to give even to superfluity,
   that a forainer (or Englishman that hath been long abroad) would
   think they could neither will nor chuse, but that the asking of a
   supply were a meer formality, it is so readily granted. He is the
   fountain of all honours, and has moreover the distribution of so many
   profitable offices of the Household, of the Revenue, of State, of
   Law, of Religion, of the Navy and (since his present Majestie's time)
   of the Army, that it seems as if the Nation could scarce furnish
   honest men enow to supply all those imployments. So that the Kings of
   England are in nothing inferiour to other Princes, save in being more
   abridged from injuring their own subjects: but have as large a field
   as any of external felicity, wherein to exercise their own virtue,
   and so reward and incourage it in others. In short, there is nothing
   that comes nearer in Government to the Divine Perfection, than where
   the Monarch, as with us, injoys a capacity of doing all the good
   imaginable to mankind, under a disability to all that is
   evil."[181:1]

This was the constitution which Marvell, whose means of information
were great and whose curiosity was insatiable, believed to be in danger.
No wonder he was agitated.

The politics in which Marvell was immersed during his last years are
difficult to unravel and still more difficult to illuminate, for they
had their dim origin in the secret thoughts and wavering purposes of the
king.

Charles the Second, like many another Englishman guiltless of Stuart
blood in his veins, was mainly governed by his dislikes, his pleasures,
and his financial necessities. To suppose, as some hasty moralisers have
done, that Charles cared for nothing but his women is to misread his
character. He had many qualifications to be the chief magistrate of a
nation of shopkeepers. He was ever alive to the supreme importance of
English trade upon the high seas. His thoughts were often turned in the
direction of the Indies, east and west. He took a constant, though not
always an honest, interest in the navy. He hated Holland for more
reasons than one, but among these reasons was his hatred of England's
most formidable and malicious trade competitor. He also disliked her
arid and ugly Protestantism, and blood being thicker than water, he
hated Holland for what he considered her shabby treatment of his
youthful nephew, whose ultimate destiny was happily hidden from
Whitehall. Among Charles's many dislikes must be included the Anglican
bishops, who had prevented him from keeping his word, and foiled his
purpose of a wide toleration. He envied his brother of France the wide
culture, the literature and art of Catholicism. He regretted the
Reformation, and would have been best pleased to see the English Church
in communion with Rome and in possession of "Anglican liberties" akin
to those enjoyed by the Gallican Church. Charles was also jealous of
Louis the Fourteenth, and in many moods had no mind to play perpetually
a second fiddle. He longed for a navy to sweep the seas, for an army
strong enough to keep his Parliament in check, and for liberty for
himself and for all those of his subjects who were so minded, to hear
Mass on Sundays. Behind, and above, and always surrounding these desires
and dislikes, was an ever-present, ever-pressing need for money. Like a
royal Becky Sharp, Charles might have found it easy to be a patriotic
king on five millions a year.

The king was his own Foreign Minister, and being what he was, and swayed
by the considerations I have imperfectly described, his foreign policy
was necessarily tortuous and perplexing. As Ranke says, "Charles was
capable of proposing offensive alliances to the three neighbouring
powers, to the Dutch against France, to the French against Spain and
Holland, to the Spaniards against France to the detriment of Holland,
but in these propositions two fundamental views always recur--demands
for money, and assurance of world-wide commerce for England."[183:1]

Charles first allowed Sir William Temple, a cool, prudent man, to form,
in a famous five days' negotiation, the defensive treaty with Holland,
which, after Sweden had joined it, became known as the Triple Alliance
(1668). This alliance had for its objects mutual promises between the
contracting parties to come to each other's assistance by sea and land
if attacked by any power (France being here intended), to force Spain to
make peace with France on the terms already offered, and to compel
France to keep those terms when agreed to by Spain.

The Triple Alliance was not only very popular in England, but was good
diplomacy, for it was quite within the range of practical politics that
France and Holland might have combined against England; nor could it
easily be maintained that the alliance was hostile to France, as it
provided that Spain should be forced to accept the terms France had
already proposed.

What wrecked the Triple Alliance and prepared the way for the secret
Treaty of Dover (1670), was the impossibility of settling those
religious difficulties which, despite the Act of Uniformity, were more
rampant than ever. The king wanted to patch up peace, and to secure some
working plan of comprehension or composure, under cover of which the
Catholic religion should be tolerated and Presbyterianism formally
recognised. But, king though he was, he could not get his way. The
Church and the House of Commons, full as the latter was of his pimps and
pensioners, were as obstinate as mules in this matter of toleration.
They would neither favour Papists nor Dissenters, protested against
Indulgences as unconstitutional, and clamoured for a rigorous
administration of that penal legislation against Nonconformists which
they had purchased with so many and such lavish supplies. As a matter of
fact, these penal laws were very fitfully enforced. In London they were
often totally disregarded, and we read of congregations numbering two
thousand openly attending Presbyterian services. The Lord Mayor for the
time being took his orders direct from the king.

What was Charles to do? After the fall of Clarendon, the king's
favourite privy councillors, called the "Cabal," because the initial
letters of their names formed a word which for some time previously had
been in common use, represent only too faithfully the confusion and
corruption of the times. Clifford was a zealous Roman, Arlington a
cautious one, Buckingham a free-thinker and mocker, friendly to France
and on good terms with the more advanced English sectaries; Ashley made
no pretence to be a Christian, but favoured philosophic toleration;
whilst Lauderdale, one of the most learned ministers that ever sat in
council (so Ranke says[185:1]), was, as a matter of profession, a
Presbyterian, but in reality a man wholly and slavishly devoted to the
king's interests, and prepared at any moment to pour into the kingdom
soldiers from Scotland to purge or suppress all Free Institutions.

Irritated, disgusted, thwarted, and annoyed, the king, acting, it well
may be, under the influence of his accomplished sister, the beautiful
and ill-fated Duchess of Orleans, struck up, to use Marvell's own words,
"an invisible league with France." The negotiations were either by word
of mouth or by letters which have been burnt. Dr. Lingard in his history
gives an interesting account of this mysterious transaction. Two things
are apparent as the objects of the Treaty of Dover. The Dutch Republic
is to be destroyed, and the cause of Catholicism in England is to be
promoted and maintained. It was this latter object that seems most to
have excited the hopes of the Duchess of Orleans. A woman's hand is
traceable throughout. Charles promised to profess himself openly a Roman
Catholic at the time that should appear to be most expedient, and
subsequently to that profession he was to join with Louis in making war
upon the Dutch Republic. At the date of this bewildering agreement, it
was high treason by statute even to _say_ that Charles was a Roman
Catholic. In case the king's public conversion should lead to
disturbances, Louis promised an "aid" of two millions of _livres_ and an
armed force of six thousand men. He also agreed to pay the whole cost of
the Dutch War _on land_, and to contribute thirty men-of-war to the
English fleet. Holland once crushed, England's share of the plunder was
to be Walcheren, Sluys, and Cadsand. A remarkable conversion! It is
difficult to suppose that either Charles or Louis were quite serious
over this part of the business. Yet there it is. The Catholic provisions
of the secret Treaty of Dover were only known to Clifford, whose soul
was fired by them, and to Arlington, who did not share the confident
hopes of his co-religionist. Clifford thought there were thousands of
Englishmen "of light and leading" among the English Catholics who would
be both willing and able to assume the burdens of the State and to rally
round a Catholic king. Arlington thought otherwise.

The king's public conversion never took place. No hint was given of any
such impending event. Parliament met on the 24th of October 1670, and
after hearing a good deal about the Triple Alliance and voting large
sums of money, was prorogued in April 1671, and did not meet again till
February 1673.

To pick a quarrel with the Dutch was never difficult. Marvell tells us
how it was done. "A sorry yacht, but bearing the English Jack, in August
1671 sails into the midst of the Dutch fleet, singles out the Admiral,
shooting twice as they call it, sharp upon him. Which must sure have
appeared as ridiculous and unnatural as for a lark to dare the hobby."
The Dutch admiral asking "Why," was told "because he and his whole fleet
had failed to strike sail to his small craft." The Dutch commander then
"civilly excused it as a matter of the first instance, and in which he
could have no instruction, therefore proper to be referred to their
masters, and so they parted. The yacht having thus acquitted itself,
returned fraught with the quarrel she was sent for."[187:1] Surinam was
a perpetual _casus belli_. Some offence against the law of nations was
always happening there. A third matter, very full of gunpowder, was made
great use of by the promoters of the war already agreed upon. A picture
had been hung at Dort representing De Witt sailing up the Medway very
much in the manner described in Marvell's poem. Medals also had been
struck and distributed in commemoration of the same event. War was
declared against Holland by England and France in March 1672. The
Declaration of War was preceded by the Declaration of Indulgence,
whereby, wrote Marvell, "all the penal laws against Papists for which
former Parliaments had given so many supplies, and against
Nonconformists for which this Parliament had paid more largely, were at
one instant suspended in order to defraud the nation of all that
religion which they had so dearly purchased, and for which they ought at
least, the bargain being broke, to have been reimbursed."[187:2]

The unconstitutional suspension of bad laws put lovers of freedom in a
predicament. Marvell was what he calls a "composure," that is a
"comprehension," man. In the _Growth of Popery_ he sorrowfully admits
that it is the gravest reproach of human wisdom that no man seems able
or willing to find out the due temper of Government in divine matters.

   "Insomuch that it is no great adventure to say, that the world was
   better ordered under the ancient monarchies and commonwealths, that
   the number of virtuous men was then greater, and that the Christians
   found fairer quarter under those than among themselves, nor hath
   there any advantage accrued unto mankind from that most perfect and
   practical model of humane society, except the speculation of a better
   way to future happiness, concerning which the very guides disagree,
   and of those few that follow, it will suffer no man to pass without
   paying at their turnpikes." (Vol. iv. p. 280.)

The French Alliance made the war, though with Holland, unpopular.
Writers had to be hired to defend it. France was supposed to look on
with much composure as her two maritime competitors battered each
other's fleets. At sea the honours were divided between the Dutch and
the English. On land Louis had it all his own way. Besides, rumours got
abroad of an uncomfortable plot to restore Popery. Jesuits seemed to
abound. Roman Catholics asserted themselves, the laws being suspended.
An army was collected at Blackheath. The Treasury was closed. Charles
had been badly bled by the goldsmiths or bankers, who had charged him
£12 per cent.; but in commercial centres Acts of Bankruptcy are seldom
popular, and though the bankers were compelled to be content with £6 per
cent., the closing of the Treasury brought ruin into many homes.

When Parliament met in February 1673, its temper was bad. It would have
nothing to do with the Declaration of Indulgence, and though the king
had told them, in the round set terms he could so well command, that he
was resolved to stick to his declaration, he had to give way and to see
the House busy itself with a Test Bill that drove all Roman Catholics,
from the Duke of York (who had "gone over" in the spring of 1672)
downwards, out of office. The only effect of Charles's policy was to
mitigate the hostility of the House of Commons to Protestant Dissenters,
and to drive it to concentrate its jealousy upon the Catholics. Any
lurking idea of the king declaring himself a Romanist had to be
abandoned. His hatred of Parliament increased. He lost all sense of
shame, and frankly became a pensioner of France. In 1676 he concluded a
second secret treaty, whereby both Louis and himself bound themselves to
enter into no engagements with other powers without consent, and in case
of rebellion within their realms to come to each other's assistance.
Louis agreed to make Charles an annual allowance of a hundred thousand,
afterwards increased to two hundred thousand _livres_. This money was
largely spent in bribing the House of Commons. The French ambassador was
allowed an extra grant of a thousand crowns a month to keep a table for
hungry legislators.[189:1] Did not Marvell do well to be angry?

Some of Marvell's letters belonging to this gloomy period are full of
interest.


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                     "_Nov. 28, 1670._

   "DEAR WILL,--I need not tell you I am always thinking of you. All
   that has happened, which is remarkable, since I wrote, is as
   follows: The Lieutenancy of London, chiefly Sterlin the Mayor, and
   Sir J. Robinson, alarmed the King continually with the Conventicles
   there. So the King sent them strict and large powers. The Duke of
   York every Sunday would come over thence to look to the peace. To
   say truth, they met in numerous open assemblys, without any dread of
   government. But the train bands in the city, and soldiery in
   Southwark and suburbs, harassed and abused them continually; they
   wounded many, and killed some Quakers especially, while they took
   all patiently. Hence arose two things of great remark. The
   Lieutenancy, having got orders to their mind, pick out Hays and
   Jekill, the innocentist of the whole party, to show their power on.
   They offer them illegal bonds of five thousand pounds a man, which
   if they would not enter into, they must go to prison. So they were
   committed, and at last (but it is a very long story) got free. Some
   friends engaged for them. The other was the tryal of Pen and Mead,
   quakers, at the Old Baily. The jury not finding them guilty, as the
   Recorder and Mayor would have had them, they were kept without meat
   or drink some three days, till almost starved, but would not alter
   their verdict; so fined and imprisoned. There is a book out which
   relates all the passages, which were very pertinent, of the
   prisoners, but prodigiously barbarous by the Mayor and Recorder. The
   Recorder, among the rest, commended the Spanish Inquisition, saying
   it would never be well till we had something like it. The King had
   occasion for sixty thousand pounds. Sent to borrow it of the city.
   Sterlin, Robinson, and all the rest of that faction, were at it many
   a week, and could not get above ten thousand. The fanatics under
   persecution, served his Majesty. The other party, both in court and
   city, would have prevented it. But the King protested mony would be
   acceptable. So the King patched up, out of the Chamber, and other
   ways, twenty thousand pounds. The fanatics, of all sorts, forty
   thousand. The King, though against many of his council, would have
   the Parliament sit this twenty-fourth of October. He, and the Keeper
   spoke of nothing but to have mony. Some one million three hundred
   thousand pounds, to pay off the debts at interest; and eight hundred
   thousand for a brave navy next Spring. Both speeches forbid to be
   printed, for the King said very little, and the Keeper, it was
   thought, too much in his politic simple discourse of foreign
   affairs. The House was thin and obsequious. They voted at first they
   would supply him according to his occasions, _Nemine_, as it was
   remarked, _contradicente_; but few affirmatives, rather a silence as
   of men ashamed and unwilling. Sir R. Howard, Seymour, Temple, Car,
   and Hollis, openly took leave of their former party, and fell to
   head the King's busyness. There is like to be a terrible Act of
   Conventicles. The Prince of Orange here is much made of. The King
   owes him a great deal of mony. The Paper is full.--I am yours," etc.

The trial of William Penn and William Mead at the Old Bailey for a
tumultuous assembly, written by themselves, may be read in the _State
Trials_, vol. vi. The trial was the occasion of Penn's famous remark to
the Recorder of London, who, driven wellnigh distracted by Penn's
dialectics, exclaimed, "If I should suffer you to ask questions till
to-morrow morning you would never be the wiser." "That," replied Penn,
"would be according as the answers are."


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                            (Undated.)

   "DEAR WILL,--The Parliament are still proceeding, but not much
   advanced on their eight hundred thousand pounds Bill on money at
   interest, offices, and lands; and the Excise Bills valued at four
   hundred thousand pounds a year. The first for the navy, which scarce
   will be set out. The last to be for paying one million three hundred
   thousand pounds, which the King owes at interest, and perhaps may be
   given for four, five, or six years, as the House chances to be in
   humour. But an accident happened which liked to have spoiled all:
   Sir John Coventry having moved for an imposition on the playhouses,
   Sir John Berkenhead, to excuse them, sayed they had been of great
   service to the King. Upon which Sir John Coventry desired that
   gentleman to explain whether he meant the men or the women players.
   Hereupon it is imagined, that, the House adjourning from Tuesday
   before till Thursday after Christmas-day, on the very Tuesday night
   of the adjournment, twenty-five of the Duke of Monmouth's troop, and
   some few foot, layed in wait from ten at night till two in the
   morning, by Suffolk-street, and as he returned from the Cock, where
   he supped, to his own house, they threw him down, and with a knife
   cut off almost the end of his nose; but company coming made them
   fearful to finish it, so they marched off. Sir Thomas Sands,
   lieutenant of the troop, commanded the party; and O'Brian, the Earl
   of Inchequin's son, was a principal actor. The Court hereupon
   sometimes thought to carry it with a high hand, and question Sir
   John for his words, and maintain the action. Sometimes they flagged
   in their counsels. However, the King commanded Sir Thomas Clarges,
   and Sir W. Pultney, to release Wroth and Lake, who were two of the
   actors, and taken. But the night before the House met they
   surrendered them again. The House being but sullen the next day, the
   Court did not oppose adjourning for some days longer till it was
   filled. Then the House went upon Coventry's busyness, and voted that
   they would go upon nothing else whatever till they had passed a
   Bill, as they did, for Sands, O'Brian, Parry, and Reeves, to come in
   by the sixteenth of February, or else be condemned, and never to be
   pardoned, but by an express Act of Parliament, and their names
   therein inserted, for fear of being pardoned in some general act of
   grace. Farther of all such actions, for the future on any man,
   felony, without clergy; and who shall otherwise strike or wound any
   parliament-man, during his attendance, or going or coming,
   imprisonment for a year, treble damages, and incapacity. This Bill
   having in some few days been dispatched to the Lords, the House has
   since gone on in grand Committee upon the first eight hundred
   thousand pounds Bill, but are not yet half way. But now the Lords,
   instead of the sixteenth of February, put twenty-five days after the
   King's royal assent, and that registered in their journal; they
   disagree in several other things, but adhere in that first, which is
   most material. Adhere, in this place, signifies not to be retracted,
   and excludes a free conference. So that this week the Houses will be
   in danger of splitting, without much wisdom or force. For
   considering that Sir Thomas Sands was the very person sent to
   Clarges and Pultney, that O'Brian was concealed in the Duke of
   Monmouth's lodgings, that Wroth and Lake were bayled at the sessions
   by order from Mr. Attorney, and that all persons and things are
   perfectly discovered, that act will not be passed without great
   consequence. George's father obliges you much in Tangier. Prince
   Edgar is dying. The Court is at the highest pitch of want and
   luxury, and the people full of discontent, Remember me to
   yourselves."


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                            (Undated.)

   "DEAR WILL,--I think I have not told you that, on our Bill of
   Subsidy, the Lord Lucas made a fervent bold speech against our
   prodigality in giving, and the weak looseness of the government, the
   King being present; and the Lord Clare another to persuade the King
   that he ought not to be present. But all this had little
   encouragement, not being seconded. Copys going about everywhere, one
   of them was brought into the Lords' House, and Lord Lucas was asked
   whether it was his. He sayd part was, and part was not. Thereupon
   they took advantage, and sayed it was a libel even against Lucas
   himself. On this they voted it a libel, and to be burned by the
   hangman. Which was done; but the sport was, the hangman burned the
   Lords' order with it. I take the last quarrel betwixt us and the
   Lords to be as the ashes of that speech. Doubtless you have heard,
   before this time, how Monmouth, Albemarle, Dunbane, and seven or
   eight gentlemen, fought with the watch, and killed a poor bedle.
   They have all got their pardons, for Monmouth's sake; but it is an
   act of great scandal. The King of France is at Dunkirke. We have no
   fleet out, though we gave the Subsidy Bill, valued at eight hundred
   thousand pounds, for that purpose. I believe, indeed, he will
   attempt nothing on us, but leave us to dy a natural death. For
   indeed never had poor nation so many complicated, mortal, incurable,
   diseases. You know the Dutchess of York is dead. All gave her for a
   Papist. I think it will be my lot to go on an honest fair employment
   into Ireland. Some have smelt the court of Rome at that distance.
   There I hope I shall be out of the smell of our.... --Yours," etc.


   _To a Friend in Persia._
                                                    "_August 9, 1671._

   "DEAR SIR,--I have yours of the 12th of October 1670, which was in
   all respects most welcome to me, except when I considered that to
   write it you endured some pain, for you say your hand is not yet
   recovered. If I could say any thing to you towards the advancement
   of your affairs, I could, with a better conscience, admit you should
   spend so much of your precious time, as you do, upon me. But you
   know how far those things are out of my road, tho', otherwise, most
   desirous in all things to be serviceable to you. God's good
   providence, which hath through so dangerous a disease and so many
   difficultys preserved and restored you, will, I doubt not, conduct
   you to a prosperous issue, and the perfection of your so laudable
   undertakings. And, under that, your own good genius, in conjunction
   with your brother here, will, I hope, though at the distance of
   England and Persia, in good time operate extraordinary effects; for
   the magnetism of two souls, rightly touched, works beyond all
   natural limits, and it would be indeed too unequal, if good nature
   should not have at least as large a sphere of activity, as malice,
   envy, and detraction, which are, it seems, part of the returns from
   Gombroon and Surat. All I can say to you in that matter is, that you
   must, seeing it will not be better, stand upon your guard; for in
   this world a good cause signifys little, unless it be as well
   defended. A man may starve at the feast of good conscience. My
   fencing master in Spain, after he had instructed me all he could,
   told me, I remember, there was yet one secret, against which there
   was no defence, and that was, to give the first blow. I know your
   maxim, _Qui festinat ditescere, non erit innocens_. Indeed while you
   preserve that mind, you will have the blessing both of God and man.
   In general I perceive, and am very glad of it, that by your good
   management, your friends here get ground, and the flint in your
   adversarys' hearts begins to be mollifyed. Now after my usual
   method, leaving to others what relates to busyness, I address
   myself, which is all I am good for, to be your gazettier. I am sorry
   to perceive that mine by the Armenian miscarryed. Tho' there was
   nothing material in it, the thoughts of friends are too valuable to
   fall into the hands of a stranger. I wrote the last February at
   large, and wish it a better passage. In this perhaps I may interfere
   something with that, chusing rather to repeat than omit. The King
   having, upon pretence of the great preparations of his neighbours,
   demanded three hundred thousand pounds for his navy (though in
   conclusion he hath not set out any) and that the Parliament should
   pay his debts, which the ministers would never particularize to the
   House of Commons, our House gave several bills. You see how far
   things were stretched, though beyond reason, there being no
   satisfaction how those debts were contracted, and all men foreseeing
   that what was given would not be applyed to discharge the debts,
   which I hear are at this day risen to four millions, but diverted as
   formerly. Nevertheless such was the number of the constant courtiers
   increased by the apostate patriots, who were bought off, for that
   turn, some at six, others ten, one at fifteen thousand pounds in
   money, besides what offices, lands, and reversions, to others, that
   it is a mercy they gave not away the whole land, and liberty, of
   England. The Earl of Clare made a very bold and rational harangue,
   the King being present, against the King's sitting among the Lords,
   contrary to former precedents, during their debates; but he was not
   seconded. The King had this April prorogued, upon the Houses
   cavilling, and their harsh conferences concerning some bills, the
   Parliament from this April till the 16th of April 1672. Sir John
   Coventry's Bill against Cutting Noses passed, and O'Brian and Sir
   Thomas Sands, not appearing at the Old Baily by the time limited,
   stand attainted and outlawed, without possibility of pardon. The
   Duke of Buckingham is again one hundred and forty thousand pounds in
   debt, and, by this prorogation, his creditors have time to tear all
   his lands in pieces. The House of Commons has run almost to the end
   of their line, and are grown extreme chargeable to the King, and
   odious to the people. Lord St. John, Marquess of Westminster's son,
   one of the House of Commons, Sir Robert Howard, Sir John Benet, Lord
   Arlington's brother, Sir William Bucknoll, the brewer, all of the
   House, in fellowship with some others of the city, have farmed the
   old customs, with the new act of Imposition upon Wines, and the Wine
   Licenses, at six hundred thousand pounds a year, to begin this
   Michaelmas. You may be sure they have covenants not to be losers.
   They have signed and sealed ten thousand pounds a year more to the
   Duchess of Cleveland, who has likewise near ten thousand pounds a
   year out of the new farm of the country excise of Beer and Ale, five
   thousand pounds a year out of the Post Office, and, they say, the
   reversion of all the King's leases, the reversion of places all in
   the Custom House, the green wax, and indeed, what not? All
   promotions, spiritual and temporal, pass under her cognizance.
   Buckingham runs out of all with the Lady Shrewsbury, by whom he
   believes he had a son, to whom the King stood godfather; it dyed,
   young Earl of Coventry, and was buryed in the sepulchre of his
   fathers. The King of France made a warlike progresse this summer
   through his conquests of Flanders, but kept the peace there, and
   detains still the Dutchy of Lorain, and has stired up the German
   Princes against the free towns. The Duke of Brunswick has taken the
   town of Brunswick; and now the Bishop of Cullen is attacking the
   city of Colen. We truckle to France in all things, to the prejudice
   of our honour. Barclay is still Lieutenant of Ireland; but he was
   forced to come over to pay ten thousand pounds rent to his Landlady
   Cleveland. My Lord Angier, who bought of Sir George Carteret for
   eleven thousand pounds, the Vice-treasurership of Ireland, worth
   five thousand pounds a year, is, betwixt knavery and foolery, turned
   out. Dutchess of York and Prince Edgar, dead. None left but
   daughters. One Blud, outlawed for a plot to take Dublin Castle, and
   who seized on the Duke of Ormond here last year, and might have
   killed him, a most bold, and yet sober fellow, some months ago
   seized the crown and sceptre in the Tower, took them away, and if he
   had killed the keeper, might have carried them clear off. He, being
   taken, astonished the King and Court, with the generosity, and
   wisdom, of his answers. He, and all his accomplices, for his sake,
   are discharged by the King, to the wonder of all.--Yours," etc.


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                         "_June 1672._

   "DEAR WILL,--Affairs begin to alter, and men talk of a peace with
   Holland, and taking them into our protection; and it is my opinion
   it will be before Michaelmas, for some reasons, not fit to write. We
   cannot have a peace with France and Holland both. The Dutch are now
   brought very low; but Amsterdam, and some other provinces, are
   resolved to stand out till the last. De-wit is stabbed, and dead of
   his wounds. It was at twelve a clock at night, the 11th of this
   month, as he came from the council at the Hague. Four men wounded
   him with their swords. But his own letter next morning to the States
   says nothing appeared mortal. The whole Province of Utrecht is
   yielding up. No man can conceive the condition of the State of
   Holland, in this juncture, unless he can at the same time conceive
   an earthquake, an hurricane, and the deluge. France is potent and
   subtle. Here have been several fires of late. One at St.
   Catherine's, which burned about six score or two hundred houses, and
   some seven or eight ships. Another in Bishopsgate-street. Another in
   Crichet Fryars. Another in Southwark; and some elsewhere. You may be
   sure all the old talk is hereupon revived. There was the other day,
   though not on this occasion, a severe proclamation issued out
   against all who shall vent false news, or discourse ill concerning
   affairs of state. So that in writing to you I run the risque of
   making a breech in the commandment.--Yours," etc.

The following letter deals with another matter of human concern than
politics, for it seeks to condole with a father who has lost an only
son.


   _To Sir John Trott_
                                                            (Undated.)

   "HONOURED SIR,--I have not that vanity to believe, if you weigh your
   late loss by the common ballance, that any thing I can write to you
   should lighten your resentments: nor if you measure things by the
   rules of christianity, do I think it needful to comfort you in your
   duty and your son's happyness. Only having a great esteem and
   affection for you, and the grateful memory of him that is departed
   being still green and fresh upon my spirit, I cannot forbear to
   inquire, how you have stood the second shock at your sad meeting of
   friends in the country. I know that the very sight of those who have
   been witnesses of our better fortune, doth but serve to reinforce a
   calamity. I know the contagion of grief and infection of tears, and
   especially when it runs in a blood. And I myself could sooner imitate
   than blame those innocent relentings of nature, so that they spring
   from tenderness only and humanity, not from an implacable sorrow. The
   tears of a family may flow together like those little drops that
   compact the rainbow, and if they be placed with the same advantage
   towards Heaven as those are to the sun, they too have their
   splendour; and like that bow, while they unbend into seasonable
   showers, yet they promise, that there shall not be a second flood.
   But the dissoluteness of grief, the prodigality of sorrow, is neither
   to be indulged in a man's self, nor complyed with in others. If that
   were allowable in these cases, Eli's was the readyest way and highest
   compliment of mourning, who fell back from his seat and broke his
   neck. But neither does that precedent hold. For though he had been
   Chancellor, and in effect King of Israel, for so many years (and such
   men value, as themselves, their losses at an higher rate than
   others), yet, when he heard that Israel was overcome, that his two
   sons Hophni and Phineas were slain in one day, and saw himself so
   without hope of issue, and which imbittered it farther, without
   succession to the government, yet he fell not till the news that the
   ark of God was taken. I pray God that we may never have the same
   parallel perfected in our publick concernments. Then we shall need
   all the strength of grace and nature to support us. But on a private
   loss, and sweetened with so many circumstances as yours, to be
   impatient, to be uncomfortable would be to dispute with God. Though
   an only son be inestimable, yet it is like Jonah's sin, to be angry
   at God for the withering of his shadow. Zipporah, though the delay
   had almost cost her husband his life, yet, when he did but circumcise
   her son, in a womanish peevishness reproached Moses as a bloody
   husband. But if God take the son himself, but spare the father, shall
   we say that He is a bloody God? He that gave His own son, may He not
   take ours? It is pride that makes a rebel; and nothing but the
   over-weening of ourselves and our own things that raises us against
   Divine Providence. Whereas Abraham's obedience was better than
   sacrifice. And if God please to accept both, it is indeed a farther
   tryal, but a greater honour. I could say over upon this beaten
   occasion most of those lessons of morality and religion which have
   been so often repeated, and are as soon forgotten. We abound with
   precept, but we want examples. You, sir, that have all these things
   in your memory, and the clearness of whose judgment is not to be
   obscured by any greater interposition, should be exemplary to others
   in your own practice. 'Tis true, it is an hard task to learn and
   teach at the same time. And, where yourselves are the experiment, it
   is as if a man should dissect his own body, and read the anatomy
   lecture. But I will not heighten the difficulty while I advise the
   attempt. Only, as in difficult things, you would do well to make use
   of all that may strengthen and assist you; the word of God; the
   society of good men; and the books of the ancients; there is one way
   more, which is by diversion, business, and activity; which are also
   necessary to be used in their season. But I myself, who live to so
   little purpose, can have little authority or ability to advise you in
   it, who are a person that are and may be much more so, generally
   useful. All that I have been able to do since, hath been to write
   this sorry Elogy of your son, which if it be as good as I could wish,
   it is as yet no indecent employment. However, I know you will take
   any thing kindly from your very affectionate friend, and most humble
   servant."

Milton died on the 8th of November 1674. Marvell remained among the
poet's intimate friends until the end, and intended to write his life.
It is idle to mourn the loss of an unwritten book, but Marvell's life of
Milton would have been a treasure.[199:1]

When Parliament met on the 13th of April 1675, members found in their
places a mock-speech from the throne. They _knew_ the hand that had
penned it. It was a daring production and ran as follows:--

   _His Majesty's Most Gracious Speech to Both Houses of Parliament_.

   "MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,--I told you at our last meeting, the winter
   was the fittest time for business, and truly I thought so, till my
   Lord Treasurer assured me the spring was the best season for sallads
   and subsidies. I hope therefore that April will not prove so
   unnatural a month, as not to afford some kind showers on my parched
   exchequer, which gapes for want of them. Some of you, perhaps, will
   think it dangerous to make me too rich; but I do not fear it; for I
   promise you faithfully, whatever you give me I will always want; and
   although in other things my word may be thought a slender authority,
   yet in that, you may rely on me, I will never break it.

   "MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,--I can bear my straits with patience; but my
   Lord Treasurer does protest to me, that the revenue, as it now
   stands, will not serve him and me too. One of us must pinch for it,
   if you do not help me. I must speak freely to you: I am under bad
   circumstances, for besides my harlots in service, my reformado
   concubines lye heavy upon me. I have a passable good estate, I
   confess, but, God's-fish, I have a great charge upon 't. Here's my
   Lord Treasurer can tell, that all the money designed for next
   summer's guards must, of necessity, be applyed to the next year's
   cradles and swadling-cloths. What shall we do for ships then? I hint
   this only to you, it being your busyness, not mine. I know, by
   experience, I can live without ships. I lived ten years abroad
   without, and never had my health better in my life; but how you will
   be without, I leave to yourselves to judge, and therefore hint this
   only by the bye: I do not insist upon it. There's another thing I
   must press more earnestly, and that is this:--It seems a good part of
   my revenue will expire in two or three years, except you will be
   pleased to continue it. I have to say for 't, pray, why did you give
   me so much as you have done, unless you resolve to give on as fast as
   I call for it? The nation hates you already for giving so much, and
   I'll hate you too, if you do not give me more. So that if you stick
   not to me, you must not have a friend in England. On the other hand,
   if you will give me the revenue I desire, I shall be able to do those
   things for your religion and liberty, that I have had long in my
   thoughts, but cannot effect them without a little more money to carry
   me through. Therefore look to 't and take notice that if you do not
   make me rich enough to undo you, it shall lie at your doors. For my
   part I wash my hands on 't. But that I may gain your good opinion,
   the best way is to acquaint you what I have done to deserve it, out
   of my royal care for your religion and your property. For the first,
   my proclamation is a true picture of my mind, He that cannot, as in a
   glass, see my zeal for the Church of England, does not deserve any
   farther satisfaction, for I declare him wilful, abominable, and not
   good. Some may, perhaps, be startled, and cry, how comes this sudden
   change? To which I answer, I am a changling, and that's sufficient, I
   think. But to convince men farther, that I mean what I say, there are
   these arguments:--

      "First, I tell you so, and you know I never break my word.

      "Secondly, My Lord Treasurer says so, and he never told a lye in
         his life.

      "Thirdly, My Lord Lauderdale will undertake it for me; and I
         should be loath, by any act of mine, he should forfeit the
         credit he has with you.

   "If you desire more instances of my zeal, I have them for you. For
   example, I have converted my natural sons from Popery; and I may say,
   without vanity, it was my own work, so much the more peculiarly mine
   than the begetting them. 'Twould do one's heart good to hear how
   prettily George can read already in the Psalter. They are all fine
   children, God bless 'em, and so like me in their understandings. But,
   as I was saying, I have, to please you, given a pension to your
   favourite my Lord Lauderdale; not so much that I thought he wanted
   it, as that you would take it kindly. I have made Carwell dutchess of
   Portsmouth, and marryed her sister to the Earl of Pembroke. I have,
   at my brother's request, sent my Lord Inchequin into Barbary, to
   settle the Protestant Religion among the Moors, and an English
   Interest at Tangier. I have made Crew Bishop of Durham, and, at the
   first word of my Lady Portsmouth, Prideaux Bishop of Chichester. I
   know not, for my part, what factious men would have; but this I am
   sure of, my predecessors never did anything like this, to gain the
   good will of their subjects. So much for your religion, and now for
   your property. My behaviour to the Bankers is a publick instance; and
   the proceedings between Mrs. Hyde and Mrs. Sutton for private ones,
   are such convincing evidences, that it will be needless to say any
   more to 't.

   "I must now acquaint you, that, by my Lord Treasurer's advice, I have
   made a considerable retrenchment upon my expenses in candles and
   charcoal, and do not intend to stop there, but will, with your help,
   look into the late embezzlements of my dripping-pans and
   kitchen-stuff; of which, by the way, upon my conscience, neither my
   Lord Treasurer nor my Lord Lauderdale are guilty. I tell you my
   opinion; but if you should find them dabling in that busyness, I tell
   you plainly, I leave 'em to you; for, I would have the world to know,
   I am not a man to be cheated.

   "My Lords and Gentlemen, I desire you to believe me as you have found
   me; and I do solemnly promise you, that whatsoever you give me shall
   be specially managed with the same conduct, trust, sincerity, and
   prudence, that I have ever practised, since my happy
   restoration."[202:1]

Mock King's Speeches have often been made, but this is the first, and I
think still the best of them all.

There was no shaking off religion from the debates of those days. A new
Oaths Bill suddenly appeared in the House of Lords, where it gave rise
to one of the greatest debates that assembly has ever witnessed,
lasting seventeen days. The bishops were baited by the peers with great
spirit, and the report of the proceedings may still be read with gusto.

Marvell, in his _Growth of Popery_, thus describes what happened:--

   "While these things were upon the anvil, the 10th of November was
   come for the Parliament's sitting, but that was put off till the 13th
   of April 1675. And in the meantime, which fell out most opportune for
   the conspirators, these counsels were matured, and something further
   to be contrived, that was yet wanting; the Parliament accordingly
   meeting, and the House of Lords, as well as that of the Commons,
   being in deliberation of several wholesome bills, such as the present
   state of the nation required, the great design came out in a bill
   unexpectedly offered one morning in the House of Lords, whereby all
   such as injoyed any beneficial office, or imployment, ecclesiastical,
   civil, or military, to which was added privy counsellors, justices of
   the peace, and members of Parliament, were under a penalty to take
   the oath, and make the declaration, and abhorrence, insuring:--

      'I A.B. do declare, that it is not lawful upon any pretence
         whatsoever to take up arms against the King, and that I do
         abhor that traiterous position of taking arms by his authority
         against his person, or against those that are commissioned by
         him in pursuance of such commission. And I do swear, that I
         will not at any time indeavour the alteration of the government
         either in Church or State. So help me God.'

   "This same oath had been brought into the House of Commons in the
   plague year at Oxford, to have been imposed upon the nation, but
   there, by the assistance of those very same persons that now
   introduce it, 'twas thrown out, for fear of a general infection of
   the vitals of this kingdom; and though it passed then in a particular
   bill, known by the name of the Five Mile Act, because it only
   concerned the non-conformist preachers, yet even in that, it was
   thoroughly opposed by the late Earl of Southampton, whose judgement
   might well have been reckoned for the standard of prudence and
   loyalty."[204:1]

Of the proposed oath Marvell says, "No Conveyancer could ever in more
compendious or binding terms have drawn a dissettlement of the whole
birthright of England."

This was no mere legal quibbling.

   "These things are no niceties, or remote considerations (though in
   making of laws, and which must come afterwards under construction of
   judges, _durante bene placito_, all cases are to be put and imagined)
   but there being an act in Scotland for 20,000 men to march into
   England upon call, and so great a body of English soldiery in France,
   within summons, besides what foreigners may be obliged by treaty to
   furnish, and it being so fresh in memory, what sort of persons had
   lately been in commission among us, to which add the many books then
   printed by license, writ, some by men of the black, one of the green
   cloth, wherein the absoluteness of the English monarchy is against
   all law asserted.

   "All these considerations put together were sufficient to make any
   honest and well advised man to conceive indeed, that upon the passing
   of this oath and declaration, the whole sum of affairs depended.

   "It grew therefore to the greatest contest, that has perhaps ever
   been in Parliament, wherein those Lords, that were against this oath,
   being assured of their own loyalty and merit, stood up now for the
   English liberties with the same genius, virtue, and courage, that
   their noble ancestors had formerly defended the great Charter of
   England, but with so much greater commendation, in that they had here
   a fairer field and a more civil way of decision; they fought it out
   under all the disadvantages imaginable; they were overlaid by
   numbers; the noise of the House, like the wind, was against them, and
   if not the sun, the fireside was always in their faces; nor being so
   few, could they, as their adversaries, withdraw to refresh themselves
   in a whole day's ingagement: yet never was there a clearer
   demonstration how dull a thing is humane eloquence, and greatness
   how little, when the bright truth discovers all things in their
   proper colours and dimensions, and shining, shoots its beams thorow
   all their fallacies. It might be injurious, where all of them did so
   excellently well, to attribute more to any one of those Lords than
   another, unless because the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of
   Shaftesbury, have been the more reproached for this brave action, it
   be requisite by a double proportion of praise to set them two on
   equal terms with the rest of their companions in honour. The
   particular relation in this debate, which lasted many days, with
   great eagerness on both sides, and the reasons but on one, was in the
   next Session burnt by order of the Lords, but the sparks of it will
   eternally fly in their adversaries' faces."[205:1]

In a letter to his constituents, dated April 22, 1675, Marvell was
content to say: "The Lords sate the whole day yesterday till ten at
night without rising (and the King all the while but of our addresses
present) upon their Bill of Test in both houses and are not yet come to
the question of committing it."

After prolonged discussion the Oath Bill was sent to the Commons, where
doubtless it must have passed, had not a furious privilege quarrel over
Sir John Fagg's case made prorogation in June almost a necessity. In
October Parliament met again, and at once resolved itself into a
Committee upon Religion to prevent the growth of Popery. This time the
king made almost an end of the Parliament by a prorogation which lasted
from November 1675 until February 1677--a period of fifteen months.

On the re-assembling of Parliament the Duke of Buckingham fathered the
argument much used during the long recess, that a prorogation extending
beyond twelve months was in construction of law a dissolution.

For the expression of this opinion and the refusal to recant it the
Duke of Buckingham and three other lords were ordered to the Tower, the
king being greatly angered by the duke's request that his cook might be
allowed to wait on him. On this incident Marvell remarks: "Thus a
prorogation without precedent was to be warranted by an imprisonment
without example. A sad instance! Whereby the dignity of Parliament and
especially of the House of Peers did at present much suffer and may
probably more for the future, _for nothing but Parliament can destroy
Parliament_. If a House shall once be felon of itself and stop its own
breath, taking away that liberty of speech which the King verbally, and
of course, allows them (as now they had done in both houses) to what
purpose is it coming thither?"[206:1]

The character of this House of Commons did not improve with age.

Marvell writes in the _Growth of Popery_:--

   "In matters of money they seem at first difficult, but having been
   discoursed with in private, they are set right, and begin to
   understand it better themselves, and to convert their brethren: for
   they are all of them to be bought and sold, only their number makes
   them cheaper, and each of them doth so overvalue himself, that
   sometimes they outstand or let slip their own market.

   "It is not to be imagined, how small things, in this case, even
   members of great estates will stoop at, and most of them will do as
   much for hopes as others for fruition, but if their patience be tired
   out, they grow at last mutinous, and revolt to the country, till some
   better occasion offer.

   "Among these are some men of the best understanding were they of
   equal integrity, who affect to ingross all business, to be able to
   quash any good motion by parliamentary skill, unless themselves be
   the authors, and to be the leading men of the House, and for their
   natural lives to continue so. But these are men that have been once
   fooled, most of them, and discovered, and slighted at Court, so that
   till some turn of State shall let them in their adversaries' place,
   in the mean time they look sullen, make big motions, and contrive
   specious bills for the subject, yet only wait the opportunity to be
   the instruments of the same counsels which they oppose in others.

   "There is a third part still remaining, but as contrary in themselves
   as light and darkness; those are either the worst, or the best of
   men; the first are most profligate persons, they have neither
   estates, consciences, nor good manners, yet are therefore picked out
   as the necessary men, and whose votes will go furthest; the charges
   of their elections are defrayed, whatever they amount to, tables are
   kept for them at Whitehall, and through Westminster, that they may be
   ready at hand, within call of a question: all of them are received
   into pension, and know their pay-day, which they never fail of:
   insomuch that a great officer was pleased to say, 'That they came
   about him like so many jack-daws for cheese at the end of every
   Session.' If they be not in Parliament, they must be in prison, and
   as they are protected themselves, by privilege, so they sell their
   protections to others, to the obstruction so many years together of
   the law of the land, and the publick justice; for these it is, that
   the long and frequent adjournments are calculated, but all whether
   the court, or the monopolizers of the country party, or those that
   profane the title of old cavaliers, do equally, though upon differing
   reasons, like death apprehend a dissolution. But notwithstanding
   these, there is an handful of salt, a sparkle of soul, that hath
   hitherto preserved this gross body from putrefaction, some gentlemen
   that are constant, invariable, indeed Englishmen; such as are above
   hopes, or fears, or dissimulation, that can neither flatter, nor
   betray their king or country: but being conscious of their own
   loyalty and integrity, proceed throw good and bad report, to acquit
   themselves in their duty to God, their prince, and their nation;
   although so small a scantling in number, that men can scarce reckon
   of them more than a _quorum_; insomuch that it is less difficult to
   conceive how fire was first brought to light in the world than how
   any good thing could ever be produced out of an House of Commons so
   constituted, unless as that is imagined to have come from the rushing
   of trees, or battering of rocks together, by accident, so these, by
   their clashing with one another, have struck out an useful effect
   from so unlikely causes. But whatsoever casual good hath been wrought
   at any time by the assimilation of ambitious, factious and
   disappointed members, to the little, but solid, and unbiassed party,
   the more frequent ill effects, and consequences of so unequal a
   mixture, so long continued, are demonstrable and apparent. For while
   scarce any man comes thither with respect to the publick service, but
   in design to make and raise his fortune, it is not to be expressed,
   the debauchery, and lewdness, which, upon occasion of election to
   Parliaments, are now grown habitual thorow the nation. So that the
   vice, and the expence, are risen to such a prodigious height, that
   few sober men can indure to stand to be chosen on such conditions.
   From whence also arise feuds, and perpetual animosities, over most of
   the counties and corporations, while gentlemen of worth, spirit, and
   ancient estates and dependances, see themselves overpowered in their
   own neighbourhood by the drunkness and bribery, of their competitors.
   But if nevertheless any worthy person chance to carry the election,
   some mercenary or corrupt sheriff makes a double return, and so the
   cause is handed to the Committee of elections, who ask no better, but
   are ready to adopt his adversary into the House if he be not
   legitimate. And if the gentleman agrieved seek his remedy against the
   sheriff in Westminster-Hall, and the proofs be so palpable, that the
   King's Bench cannot invent how to do him injustice, yet the major
   part of the twelve judges shall upon better consideration vacate the
   sheriff's fine and reverse the judgement; but those of them that dare
   dissent from their brethren are in danger to be turned off the bench
   without any cause assigned. While men therefore care not thus how
   they get into the House of Commons, neither can it be expected that
   they should make any conscience of what they do there, but they are
   only intent how to reimburse themselves (if their elections were at
   their own charge) or how to bargain their votes for a place or a
   pension. They list themselves straightways into some Court faction,
   and it is as well-known among them, to what Lord each of them
   retain, as when formerly they wore coats and badges. By this long
   haunting so together, they are grown too so familiar among
   themselves, that all reverence of their own Assembly is lost, that
   they live together not like Parliament men, but like so many good
   fellows met together in a publick house to make merry. And which is
   yet worse, by being so thoroughly acquainted, they understand their
   number and party, so that the use of so publick a counsel is
   frustrated, there is no place for deliberation, no perswading by
   reason, but they can see one another's votes through both throats and
   cravats before they hear them.

   "Where the cards are so well known, they are only fit for a cheat,
   and no fair gamester but would throw them under the table."[209:1]

It is a melancholy picture.

Here, perhaps, may be best inserted the story about the proffered bribe.
The story is entitled to small credit, but as helping to swell and
maintain a tradition concerning an historical character about whom
little is positively known, it can hardly escape mention in any
biography of Marvell. A pamphlet printed in Ireland (1754) supplies an
easy flowing version of the tale.

   "The borough of Hull, in the reign of Charles II., chose Andrew
   Marvell, a young gentleman of little or no fortune, and maintained
   him in London for the service of the public. His understanding,
   integrity, and spirit, were dreadful to the then infamous
   administration. Persuaded that he would be theirs for properly
   asking, they sent his old school-fellow, the Lord Treasurer Danby, to
   renew acquaintance with him in his garret. At parting, the Lord
   Treasurer, out of _pure affection_, slipped into his hand an order
   upon the treasury for £1000, and then went to his chariot. Marvell,
   looking at the paper, calls after the Treasurer, 'My Lord, I request
   another moment.' They went up again to the garret, and Jack, the
   servant boy, was called. 'Jack, child, what had I for dinner
   yesterday?' 'Don't you remember, sir? you had the little shoulder of
   mutton that you ordered me to bring from a woman in the market.'
   'Very right, child.' 'What have I for dinner to-day?' 'Don't you
   know, sir, that you bid me lay by the _blade-bone to broil_.' ''Tis
   so, very right, child, go away.' 'My Lord, do you hear that? Andrew
   Marvell's dinner is provided; there's your piece of paper. I want it
   not. I knew the sort of kindness you intended. I live here to serve
   my constituents: the ministry may seek men for their purpose; _I am
   not one_.'"[210:1]

One more letter remains to be quoted:--


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                     "_June 10, 1678._

   "DEAR WILL,--I have time to tell you thus much of publick matters.
   The patience of the Scots, under their oppressions, is not to be
   paralleled in any history. They still continue their extraordinary
   and numerous, but peaceable, field conventicles. One Mr. Welch is
   their arch-minister, and the last letter I saw tells, people were
   going forty miles to hear him. There came out, about Christmas last,
   here, a large book concerning the growth of popery and arbitrary
   government. There have been great rewards offered in private, and
   considerable in the Gazette, to any one who could inform of the
   author or printer, but not yet discovered. Three or four printed
   books since have described, as near as it was proper to go, the man
   being a Member of Parliament, Mr. Marvell, to have been the author;
   but if he had, surely he should not have escaped being questioned in
   Parliament or some other place. My good wishes attend you."

The last letter Andrew Marvell wrote to his constituents is dated July
6, 1678. The member for Hull died in August 1678. The Parliament in
which he had sat continuously for eighteen years was at last dissolved
on the 30th of December in the year of his death.


FOOTNOTES:

[181:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 248.

[183:1] Ranke's _History of England_, vol. iii. p. 471.

[185:1] Ranke, vol. iii. p. 520.

[187:1] Grosart, vol. iv. (_Growth of Popery_), p. 275.

[187:2] _Ibid._, p. 279.

[189:1] See note to Dr. Airy's edition of Burnet's _History_, vol. ii.
p. 73.

[199:1] Marvell's commendatory verses on "Mr. Milton's Paradise Lost"
(so entitled in the volume of 1681) were first printed in the Second
Edition (1674) of Milton's great poem. Marvell did not agree with Dryden
in thinking that _Paradise Lost_ would be improved by rhyme, and says so
in these verses.

[202:1] Printed in Captain Thompson's edition, vol. i. p. 432.

[204:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 304.

[205:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 308.

[206:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 322.

[209:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 327.

[210:1] This story is first told in a balder form by Cooke in his
edition of 1726. It may be read as Cooke tells it in the _Dictionary of
National Biography_, xxxvi., p. 329. There was probably some foundation
for it.




CHAPTER VII

FINAL SATIRES AND DEATH


Marvell was no orator or debater, and though a member of Parliament for
nearly eighteen years, but rarely opened his mouth in the House of
Commons. His old enemy, Samuel Parker, whilst venting his posthumous
spite upon the author of the _Rehearsal Transprosed_, would have us
believe "that our Poet could not speak without a sound basting:
whereupon having frequently undergone this discipline, he learnt at
length to hold his tongue." There is no good reason for believing the
Bishop of Oxford, but it is the fact that, however taught, Marvell had
learnt to hold his tongue. His longest reported speech will be found in
the _Parliamentary History_, vol. iv. p. 855.[211:1] When we remember
how frequently in those days Marvell's pet subjects were under fierce
discussion, we must recognise how fixed was his habit of
self-repression.

On one occasion only are we enabled to catch a glimpse of Marvell
"before the Speaker." It was in March 1677, and is thus reported in the
_Parliamentary History_, though no mention of the incident is made in
the Journals of the House:--

   "_Debate on Mr. Andrew Marvell's striking Sir Philip Harcourt, March
   29._--Mr. Marvell, coming up the house to his place, stumbling at Sir
   Philip Harcourt's foot, in recovering himself, seemed to give Sir
   Philip a box on the ear. The Speaker acquainting the house 'That he
   saw a box on the ear given, and it was his duty to inform the house
   of it,' this debate ensued.

   "Mr. _Marvell_. What passed was through great acquaintance and
   familiarity betwixt us. He neither gave him an affront, nor intended
   him any. But the Speaker cast a severe reflection upon him yesterday,
   when he was out of the house, and he hopes that, as the Speaker keeps
   us in order, he will keep himself in order for the future.

   "Sir _John Ernly_. What the Speaker said yesterday was in Marvell's
   vindication. If these two gentlemen are friends already, he would not
   make them friends, and would let the matter go no further.

   "Sir _Job. Charlton_ is sorry a thing of this nature has happened,
   and no more sense of it. You in the Chair, and a stroke struck!
   Marvell deserves for his reflection on you, Mr. Speaker, to be called
   in question. You cannot do right to the house unless you question it;
   and moves to have Marvell sent to the Tower.

   "The _Speaker_. I saw a blow on one side, and a stroke on the other.

   "Sir _Philip Harcourt_. Marvell had some kind of a stumble, and mine
   was only a thrust; and the thing was accidental.

   "Sir _H. Goodrick_. The persons have declared the thing to be
   accidental, but if done in jest, not fit to be done here. He believes
   it an accident, and hopes the house thinks so too.

   "Mr. Sec. _Williamson_. This does appear, that the action for that
   time was in some heat. He cannot excuse Marvell who made a very
   severe reflection on the Speaker, and since it is so enquired,
   whether you have done your duty, he would have Marvell withdraw, that
   you may consider of it.

   "Col. _Sandys_. Marvell has given you trouble, and instead of
   excusing himself, reflects upon the Speaker: a strange confidence, if
   not an impudence!

   "Mr. _Marvell_. Has so great a respect to the privilege, order, and
   decency, of the house, that he is content to be a sacrifice for it.
   As to the casualty that happened, he saw a seat empty, and going to
   sit in it, his friend put him by, in a jocular manner, and what he
   did was of the same nature. So much familiarity has ever been between
   them, that there was no heat in the thing. He is sorry he gave an
   offence to the house. He seldom speaks to the house, and if he commit
   an error, in the manner of his speech, being not so well tuned, he
   hopes it is not an offence. Whether out or in the house, he has a
   respect to the Speaker. But he has been informed that the Speaker
   resumed something he had said, with reflection. He did not think fit
   to complain of Mr. Seymour to Mr. Speaker. He believes that is not
   reflective. He desires to comport himself with all respect to the
   house. This passage with Harcourt was a perfect casualty, and if you
   think fit, he will withdraw, and sacrifice himself to the censure of
   the house.

   "Sir _Henry Capel_. The blow given Harcourt was with his hat; the
   Speaker cast his eye upon both of them, and both respected him. He
   would not aggravate the thing. Marvell submits, and he would have you
   leave the thing as it is.

   "_Sir Robert Holmes_ saw the whole action. Marvell flung about three
   or four times with his hat, and then gave Harcourt a box on the ear.

   "Sir _Henry Capel_ desires, now that his honour is concerned, that
   Holmes may explain, whether he saw not Marvell with his hat only give
   Harcourt the stroke 'at that time.' Possibly 'at another time' it
   might be.

   "The _Speaker_. Both Holmes and Capel are in the right. But Marvell
   struck Harcourt so home, that his fist, as well as his hat, hit him.

   "Sir _R. Howard_ hopes the house will not have Harcourt say he
   received a blow, when he has not. He thinks what has been said by
   them both sufficient.

   "Mr. _Garraway_ hopes, that by the debate we shall not make the thing
   greater than it is. Would have them both reprimanded for it.

   "Mr. Sec. _Williamson_ submits the honour of the house to the house.
   Would have them made friends, and give that necessary assurance to
   the house, and he, for his part, remains satisfied.

   "Sir _Tho. Meres_. By our long sitting together, we lose, by our
   familiarity and acquaintance, the decencies of the house. He has seen
   500 in the house, and people very orderly; not so much as to read a
   letter, or set up a foot. One could scarce know anybody in the house,
   but him that spoke. He would have the Speaker declare that order
   ought to be kept; but as to that gentleman (Marvell) to rest
   satisfied."

The general impression left upon the mind is that of a friendly-familiar
but choleric gentleman, full of likes and dislikes, readier with his
tongue in the lobby than with "set" speeches in the Chamber. A solitary
politician with a biting pen. Satirists must not complain if they have
enemies.

Marvell's vein of satire was never worked out, and the political poems
of his last decade are fuller than ever of a savage humour. How he kept
his ears is a repeated wonder. He is said to have been on terms of
intimate friendship with Prince Rupert, and it is a steady tradition
that the king was one of his amused readers. It is hard to believe that
even Charles the Second could have seen any humour, good or bad, in such
a couplet:--

    "The poor Priapus King, led by the nose,
    Looks as a thing set up to scare the crows."

Nor can the following verses have been read with much pleasure, either
at Whitehall or in a punt whilst fishing at Windsor. Their occasion was
the setting up in the stocks-market in the City of London of a statue of
the king by Sir Robert Viner, a city knight, to whom Charles was very
heavily in debt. Sir Robert, having a frugal mind, had acquired a statue
of John Sobieski trampling on the Turk, which, judiciously altered, was
made to pass muster so as to represent the Pensioner of Louis the
Fourteenth and the Vendor of Dunkirk trampling on Oliver Cromwell.

    "As cities that to the fierce conqueror yield
    Do at their own charges their citadels build;
    So Sir Robert advanced the King's statue in token
    Of bankers defeated, and Lombard Street broken.

    Some thought it a knightly and generous deed,
    Obliging the city with a King and a steed;
    When with honour he might from his word have gone back;
    He that vows in a calm is absolved by a wrack.

    But now it appears, from the first to the last,
    To be a revenge and a malice forecast;
    Upon the King's birthday to set up a thing
    That shows him a monkey much more than a King.

    When each one that passes finds fault with the horse,
    Yet all do affirm that the King is much worse;
    And some by the likeness Sir Robert suspect
    That he did for the King his own statue erect.

    Thus to see him disfigured--the herb-women chid,
    Who up on their panniers more gracefully rid;
    And so loose in his seat--that all persons agree,
    E'en Sir William Peak[215:1] sits much firmer than he.

    But Sir Robert affirms that we do him much wrong;
    'Tis the 'graver at work, to reform him, so long;
    But, alas! he will never arrive at his end,
    For it is such a King as no chisel can mend.

    But with all his errors restore us our King,
    If ever you hope in December for spring;
    For though all the world cannot show such another,
    Yet we'd rather have him than his bigoted brother."

Of a more exalted vein of satire the following extract may serve as an
example:--

    BRITANNIA AND RALEIGH

    "_Brit._ Ah! Raleigh, when thou didst thy breath resign
             To trembling James, would I had quitted mine.
             Cubs didst thou call them? Hadst thou seen this brood
             Of earls, and dukes, and princes of the blood,
             No more of Scottish race thou would'st complain,
             Those would be blessings in this spurious reign.
             Awake, arise from thy long blessed repose,
             Once more with me partake of mortal woes!

    _Ral._   What mighty power has forced me from my rest?
             Oh! mighty queen, why so untimely dressed?

    _Brit._  Favoured by night, concealed in this disguise,
             Whilst the lewd court in drunken slumber lies,
             I stole away, and never will return,
             Till England knows who did her city burn;
             Till cavaliers shall favourites be deemed,
             And loyal sufferers by the court esteemed;
             Till Leigh and Galloway shall bribes reject;
             Thus Osborne's golden cheat I shall detect:
             Till atheist Lauderdale shall leave this land,
             And Commons' votes shall cut-nose guards disband:
             Till Kate a happy mother shall become,
             Till Charles loves parliaments, and James hates Rome.

    _Ral._   What fatal crimes make you for ever fly
             Your once loved court, and martyr's progeny?

    _Brit._  A colony of French possess the Court,
             Pimps, priests, buffoons, i' the privy-chamber sport.
             Such slimy monsters ne'er approached the throne
             Since Pharaoh's reign, nor so defiled a crown.
             I' the sacred ear tyrannic arts they croak,
             Pervert his mind, his good intentions choke;
             Tell him of golden Indies, fairy lands,
             Leviathan, and absolute commands.
             Thus, fairy-like, the King they steal away,
             And in his room a Lewis changeling lay.
             How oft have I him to himself restored.
             In's left the scale, in 's right hand placed the sword?
             Taught him their use, what dangers would ensue
             To those that tried to separate these two?
             The bloody Scottish chronicle turned o'er,
             Showed him how many kings, in purple gore,
             Were hurled to hell, by learning tyrant lore?
             The other day famed Spenser I did bring,
             In lofty notes Tudor's blest reign to sing;
             How Spain's proud powers her virgin arms controlled,
             And golden days in peaceful order rolled;
             How like ripe fruit she dropped from off her throne,
             Full of grey hairs, good deeds, and great renown.
    ...

    _Ral._   Once more, great queen, thy darling strive to save,
             Snatch him again from scandal and the grave;
             Present to 's thoughts his long-scorned parliament,
             The basis of his throne and government.
             In his deaf ears sound his dead father's name:
             Perhaps that spell may 's erring soul reclaim:
             Who knows what good effects from thence may spring?
             'Tis godlike good to save a falling king.

    _Brit._  Raleigh, no more, for long in vain I've tried
             The Stuart from the tyrant to divide;
             As easily learned virtuosos may
             With the dog's blood his gentle kind convey
             Into the wolf, and make his guardian turn
             To the bleating flock, by him so lately torn:
             If this imperial juice once taint his blood,
             'Tis by no potent antidote withstood.
             Tyrants, like lep'rous kings, for public weal
             Should be immured, lest the contagion steal
             Over the whole. The elect of the Jessean line
             To this firm law their sceptre did resign;
             And shall this base tyrannic brood invade
             Eternal laws, by God for mankind made?

               To the serene Venetian state I'll go,
             From her sage mouth famed principles to know;
             With her the prudence of the ancients read,
             To teach my people in their steps to tread;
             By their great pattern such a state I'll frame,
             Shall eternize a glorious lasting name.
             Till then, my Raleigh, teach our noble youth
             To love sobriety, and holy truth;
             Watch and preside over their tender age,
             Lest court corruption should their souls engage;
             Teach them how arts, and arms, in thy young days,
             Employed our youth--not taverns, stews, and plays;
             Tell them the generous scorn their race does owe
             To flattery, pimping, and a gaudy show;
             Teach them to scorn the Carwells, Portsmouths, Nells,
             The Clevelands, Osbornes, Berties, Lauderdales:
             Poppaea, Tigelline, and Arteria's name,
             All yield to these in lewdness, lust, and fame.
             Make them admire the Talbots, Sydneys, Veres,
             Drake, Cavendish, Blake, men void of slavish fears,
             True sons of glory, pillars of the state,
             On whose famed deeds all tongues and writers wait.
             When with fierce ardour their bright souls do burn,
             Back to my dearest country I'll return."

The dialogue between the two horses, which bore upon their respective
backs the stone effigies of Charles the First at Charing Cross and
Charles the Second at Wool-Church, is, in its own rough way, masterly
satire for the popular ear.

             "If the Roman Church, good Christians, oblige ye
             To believe man and beast have spoken in effigy,
             Why should we not credit the public discourses,
             In a dialogue between two inanimate horses?
             The horses I mean of Wool-Church and Charing,
             Who told many truths worth any man's hearing,
             Since Viner and Osborn did buy and provide 'em
             For the two mighty monarchs who now do bestride 'em.
             The stately brass stallion, and the white marble steed,
             The night came together, by all 'tis agreed;
             When both kings were weary of sitting all day,
             They stole off, incognito, each his own way;
             And then the two jades, after mutual salutes,
             Not only discoursed, but fell to disputes."

The dialogue is too long to be quoted. Charles the Second's steed
boldly declares:--

    "De Witt and Cromwell had each a brave soul,
    I freely declare it, I am for old Noll;
    Though his government did a tyrant resemble,
    He made England great, and his enemies tremble."

Mr. Hollis, when he sent the picture of Cromwell by Cooper to Sidney
Sussex College, is said to have written beneath it the lines just
quoted.

The satire ends thus:--

   "_Charing Cross._ But canst them devise when things will be mended?

   _Wool-Church._    When the reign of the line of the Stuarts is ended.

   _Charing Cross._  Then England, rejoice, thy redemption draws nigh;
                     Thy oppression together with kingship shall die.

   _Chorus._  A Commonwealth, a Commonwealth we proclaim to the nation,
              For the gods have repented the King's restoration."

These probably are the lines which spread the popular, but mistaken,
belief that Marvell was a Republican.

Andrew Marvell died in his lodgings in London on the 16th of August
1678. Colonel Grosvenor, writing to George Treby, M.P. (afterwards Chief
of the Common Pleas), on the 17th of August, reports "Andrew Marvell
died yesterday of apoplexy." Parliament was not sitting at the time.
What was said of the elder Andrew may also be said of the younger: he
was happy in the moment of his death. The one just escaped the Civil
War, the other the Popish Plot.

Marvell was thought to have been poisoned. Such a suspicion in those bad
times was not far-fetched. His satires, rough but moving, had been
widely read, and his fears for the Constitution, his dread of

    "The grim Monster, Arbitrary Power,
    The ugliest Giant ever trod the earth,"

infested many breasts, and bred terror.

    "Marvell, the Island's watchful sentinel,
    Stood in the gap and bravely kept his post."

The post was one of obvious danger, and

    "Whether Fate or Art untwin'd his thread
    Remains in doubt."[220:1]

The doubt has now been dissipated by the research of an accomplished
physician, Dr. Gee, who in 1874 communicated to the _Athenæum_ (March 7,
1874) an extract from Richard Morton's {Greek: Pyretologia} (1692),
containing a full account of Marvell's sickness and death. Art "untwin'd
his thread," but it was the doctor's art. Dr. Gee's translation of
Morton's medical Latin is as follows:--

   "In this manner was that most famous man Andrew Marvell carried off
   from amongst the living before his time, to the great loss of the
   republic, and especially the republic of letters; through the
   ignorance of an old conceited doctor, who was in the habit on all
   occasions of raving excessively against Peruvian bark, as if it were
   a common plague. Howbeit, without any clear indication, in the
   interval after a third fit of regular tertian ague, and by way of
   preparation (so that all things might seem to be done most
   methodically), blood was copiously drawn from the patient, who was
   advanced in years." [Here follow more details of treatment, which I
   pass over.] "The way having been made ready after this fashion, at
   the beginning of the next fit, a great febrifuge was given, a
   draught, that is to say, of Venice treacle, etc. By the doctor's
   orders, the patient was covered up close with blankets, say rather,
   was buried under them; and composed himself to sleep and sweat, so
   that he might escape the cold shivers which are wont to accompany the
   onset of the ague-fit. He was seized with the deepest sleep and
   colliquative sweats, and in the short space of twenty-four hours from
   the time of the ague-fit, he died comatose. He died, who, had a
   single ounce of Peruvian bark been properly given, might easily have
   escaped, in twenty-four hours, from the jaws of the grave and the
   disease: and so burning with anger, I informed the doctor, when he
   told me this story without any sense of shame."

Marvell was buried on the 18th of August, "under the pews in the south
side of St. Giles's Church in the Fields, under the window wherein is
painted on glass a red lion." So writes the invaluable Aubrey, who tells
us he had the account from the sexton who made the grave.

In 1678 St. Giles's Church was a brick structure built by Laud. The
present imposing church was built on the site of the old one in 1730-34.

In 1774 Captain Thompson, so he tells us, "visited the grand mausoleum
under the church of St. Giles, to search for the coffin in which Mr.
Marvell was placed: in this vault were deposited upwards of a thousand
bodies, but I could find no plate of an earlier date than 1722; I do
therefore suppose the new church is built upon the former burial place."

The poet's grand-nephew, Mr. Robert Nettleton, in 1764 placed on the
north side of the present church, upon a black marble slab, a long
epitaph, still to be seen, recording the fact that "near to this place
lyeth the body of Andrew Marvell, Esquire." At no great distance from
this slab is the tombstone, recently brought in from the graveyard
outside, of _Georgius Chapman, Poeta_, a fine Roman monument, prepared
by the care and at the cost of the poet's friend, Inigo Jones. Still
left exposed, in what is now a doleful garden (not at all Marvellian),
is the tombstone of Richard Penderel of Boscobel, one of the five yeomen
brothers who helped Charles to escape after Worcester. Lord Herbert of
Cherbury, in 1648, and Shirley the dramatist, in 1666, had been carried
to the same place of sepulture.

Aubrey describes Marvell "as of middling stature, pretty strong-set,
roundish faced, cherry-cheeked, hazell eye, brown hair. He was, in his
conversation, very modest, and of very few words. Though he loved wine,
he would never drink hard in company, and was wont to say that he would
not play the good fellow in any man's company in whose hands he would
not trust his life. He kept bottles of wine at his lodgings, and many
times he would drink liberally by himself and to refresh his spirit and
exalt his muse. James Harrington (author of _Oceana_) was his intimate
friend; J. Pell, D.D., was one of his acquaintances. He had not a
general acquaintance."

Dr. Pell, one may remark, was a great friend of Hobbes.

In March 1679 joint administration was granted by the Prerogative Court
of Canterbury, _Mariæ Marvell relictæ et Johni Greni Creditori_. This is
the first time we hear of there being any wife in the case. A creditor
of a deceased person could not obtain administration without citing the
next of kin, but a widow was entitled, under a statute of Henry
VIII., as of right, to administration, and it may be that Mr.
Green thought the quickest way of being paid his debt was to invent a
widow. The practice of the court required an affidavit from the widow
deposing that she was the lawful relict of the deceased, but this
assertion on oath seems in ordinary cases to have been sufficient, if
the customary fees were forthcoming. Captain Thompson roundly asserts
that the alleged Mary Marvell was a cheat, and no more than the
lodging-house keeper where he had last lived--and Marvell was a
migratory man.[223:1] Mary Marvell's name appears once again, in the
forefront of the first edition of Marvell's _Poems_ (1681), where she
certifies all the contents to be her husband's works. This may have been
a publisher's, as the affidavit may have been a creditor's, artifice. As
against this, Mr. Grosart, who believed in Mary Marvell, reminds us that
Mr. Robert Boulter, the publisher of the poems, was a most respectable
man, and a friend both of Milton's and Marvell's, and not at all likely
either to cheat the public with a falsely signed certificate, or to be
cheated by a London lodging-house keeper. Whatever "Mary Marvell" may
have been, "widow, wife, or maid," she is heard of no more.

Hull was not wholly unmindful of her late and (William Wilberforce
notwithstanding) her most famous member. "On Thursday the 26th of
September 1678, in consideration of the kindness the Town and Borough
had for Andrew Marvell, Esq., one of the Burgesses of Parliament for the
same Borough (lately deceased), and for his great merits from the
Corporation. It is this day ordered by the Court that Fifty pounds be
paid out of the Town's Chest towards the discharge of his funerals
(_sic_), and to perpetuate his memory by a gravestone" (_Bench Books of
Hull_).

The incumbent of Trinity Church is said to have objected to the erection
of any monument. At all events there is none. Marvell had many enemies
in the Church. Sharp, afterwards Archbishop of York, was a Yorkshire
man, and had been domestic chaplain to Sir Heneage Finch, a
lawyer-member, much lashed by Marvell's bitter pen. Sharp had also taken
part in the quarrel with the Dissenters, and is reported to have been
very much opposed to any Hull monument to Marvell. Captain Thompson says
"the Epitaph which the Town of Hull caused to be erected to Marvell's
memory was torn down by the Zealots of the King's party." There is no
record of this occurrence.

There are several portraits of Marvell in existence--one now being in
the National Portrait Gallery. A modern statue in marble adorns the Town
Hall of Hull.


FOOTNOTES:

[211:1] In reading the early volumes of the _Parliamentary History_ the
question has to be asked, What authority is there for the reports of
speeches? In Charles the Second's time some of the speakers, both in the
Lords and Commons, evidently communicated their orations to the press.

[215:1] Lord Mayor, 1667.

[220:1] See _Marvell's Ghost_, in _Poems on Affairs of State_.

[223:1] The cottage at Highgate, long called 'Marvell's Cottage,' has
now disappeared. Several of Marvell's letters were written from
Highgate.




CHAPTER VIII

WORK AS A MAN OF LETTERS


Marvell's work as a man of letters easily divides itself into the
inevitable three parts. _First_, as a poet properly so called; _Second_,
as a political satirist using rhyme; and _Third_, as a writer of prose.

Upon Marvell's work as a poet properly so called that curious, floating,
ever-changing population to whom it is convenient to refer as "the
reading public," had no opportunity of forming any real opinion until
after the poet's death, namely, when the small folio of 1681 made its
appearance. This volume, although not containing the _Horatian Ode upon
Cromwell's Return from Ireland_ or the lines upon Cromwell's death, did
contain, saving these exceptions, all the best of Marvell's verse.

How this poetry was received, to whom and to how many it gave pleasure,
we have not the means of knowing. The book, like all other good books,
had to take its chance. Good poetry is never exactly unpopular--its
difficulty is to get a hearing, to secure a _vogue_. I feel certain that
from 1681 onwards many ingenuous souls read _Eyes and Tears_, _The
Bermudas_, _The Nymph complaining for the Death of her Fawn_, _To his
Coy Mistress_, _Young Love_, and _The Garden_ with pure delight. In 1699
the poet Pomfret, of whose _Choice_ Dr. Johnson said in 1780, "perhaps
no composition in our language has been oftener perused," and who
Southey in 1807 declared to be "the most popular of English poets"; in
1699, I say, this poet Pomfret says in a preface, sensibly enough, "to
please everyone would be a New Thing, and to write so as to please no
Body would be as New, for even Quarles and Wythers (_sic_) have their
Admirers." So liable is the public taste to fluctuations and reversals,
that to-day, though Quarles and Wither are not popular authors, they
certainly number many more readers than Pomfret, Southey's "most popular
of English poets," who has now, it is to be feared, finally disappeared
even from the Anthologies. But if Quarles and Wither had their admirers
even in 1699, the poet Marvell, we may be sure, had his also.

Marvell had many poetical contemporaries--five-and-twenty at
least--poets of mark and interest, to most of whom, as well as to some
of his immediate predecessors, he stood, as I must suppose, in some
degree of poetical relationship. With Milton and Dryden no comparison
will suggest itself, but with Donne and Cowley, with Waller and Denham,
with Butler and the now wellnigh forgotten Cleveland, with Walker and
Charles Cotton, with Rochester and Dorset, some resemblances, certain
influences, may be found and traced. From the order of his mind and his
prose style, I should judge Marvell to have been both a reader and a
critic of his contemporaries in verse and prose--though of his
criticisms little remains. Of Butler he twice speaks with great respect,
and his sole reference to the dead Cleveland is kindly. Of Milton we
know what he thought, whilst Aubrey tells us that he once heard Marvell
say that the Earl of Rochester was the only man in England that had the
true vein of satire.

Be these influences what they may or must have been, to us Marvell
occupies, as a poet, a niche by himself. A finished master of his art he
never was. He could not write verses like his friend Lovelace, or like
Cowley's _Chronicle_ or Waller's lines "On a Girdle." He had not the
inexhaustible, astonishing (though tiresome) wit of Butler. He is often
clumsy and sometimes almost babyish. One has frequently occasion to
wonder how a man of business could allow himself to be tickled by such
obvious straws as are too many of the conceits which give him pleasure.
To attribute all the conceits of this period to the influence of Dr.
Donne is but a poor excuse after all. The worst thing that can be said
against poetry is that there is so much tedium in it. The glorious
moments are all too few. It is his honest recognition of this woeful
fact that makes Dr. Johnson, with all his faults lying thick about him,
the most consolatory of our critics to the ordinary reading man.
"Tediousness is the most fatal of all faults.... Unhappily this
pernicious failure is that which an author is least able to discover. We
are seldom tiresome to ourselves.... Perhaps no man ever thought a line
superfluous when he wrote it" (_Lives of the Poets_. Under _Prior_--see
also under _Butler_).

That Marvell is never tiresome I will not assert. But he too has his
glorious moments, and they are all his own. In the whole compass of our
poetry there is nothing quite like Marvell's love of gardens and woods,
of meads and rivers and birds. It is a love not learnt from books, not
borrowed from brother-poets. It is not indulged in to prove anything. It
is all sheer enjoyment.

    "Bind me, ye woodbines, in your twines,
    Curb me about, ye gadding vines,
    And oh, so close your circles lace,
    That I may never leave this place!
    But, lest your fetters prove too weak,
    Ere I your silken bondage break,
    Do you, O brambles, chain me too,
    And, courteous briars, nail me through.
    ...
    Here at the fountain's sliding foot,
    Or at some fruit-tree's mossy root,
    Casting the body's vest aside,
    My soul into the boughs does glide;
    There, like a bird, it sits and sings."

No poet is happier than Marvell in creating the impression that he made
his verses out of doors.

    "He saw the partridge drum in the woods;
    He heard the woodcock's evening hymn;
    He found the tawny thrush's broods,
    And the shy hawk did wait for him.
    What others did at distance hear
    And guessed within the thicket's gloom
    Was shown to this philosopher,
    And at his bidding seemed to come."

                    (From Emerson's _Wood Notes_.)

Marvell's immediate fame as a true poet was, I dare say, obscured for a
good while both by its original note (for originality is always
forbidding at first sight) and by its author's fame as a satirist, and
his reputation as a lover of "liberty's glorious feast." It was as one
of the poets encountered in the _Poems on Affairs of State_ (fifth
edition, 1703) that Marvell was best known during the greater part of
the eighteenth century. As Milton's friend Marvell had, as it were, a
side-chapel in the great Miltonic temple. The patriotic member of
Parliament, who refused in his poverty the Lord-Treasurer Danby's
proffered bribe, became a character in history before the exquisite
quality of his garden-poetry was recognised. There was a cult for
Liberty in the middle of the eighteenth century, and Marvell's name was
on the list of its professors. Wordsworth's sonnet has preserved this
tradition for us.

    "Great men have been among us; hands that penn'd
    And tongues that utter'd wisdom, better none:
    The later Sydney, Marvell, Harrington."

In 1726 Thomas Cooke printed an edition of Marvell's works which
contains the poetry that was in the folio of 1681, and in 1772 Cooke's
edition was reprinted by T. Davies. It was probably Davies's edition
that Charles Lamb, writing to Godwin on Sunday, 14th December 1800, says
he "was just going to possess": a notable addition to Lamb's library,
and an event in the history of the progress of Marvell's poetical
reputation. Captain Thompson's edition, containing the _Horatian Ode_
and other pieces, followed in 1776. In the great Poetical Collection of
the Booksellers (1779-1781) which they improperly[229:1] called
"Johnson's _Poets_" (improperly, because the poets were, with four
exceptions, the choice not of the biographer but of the booksellers,
anxious to retain their imaginary copyright), Marvell has no place. Mr.
George Ellis, in his _Specimens_ of the early English poets first
published in 1803, printed from Marvell _Daphne and Chloe_ (in part) and
_Young Love_. When Mr. Bowles, that once famous sonneteer, edited Pope
in 1806, he, by way of belittling Pope, quoted two lines from Marvell,
now well known, but unfamiliar in 1806:--

    "And through the hazels thick espy
    The hatching throstle's shining eye."

He remarked upon them, "the last circumstance is new, highly poetical,
and could only have been described by one who was a real lover of
nature and a witness of her beauties in her most solitary retirement."
On this Mark Pattison makes the comment that the lines only prove that
Marvell when a boy went bird-nesting (_Essays_, vol. ii. p. 374), a
pursuit denied to Pope by his manifold infirmities. The poet Campbell,
in his _Specimens_ (1819), gave an excellent sketch of Marvell's life,
and selected _The Bermudas_, _The Nymph and Fawn_, and _Young Love_.
Then came, fresh from talk with Charles Lamb, Hazlitt, with his _Select
Poets_ (1825), which contains the _Horatian Ode_, _Bermudas_, _To his
Coy Mistress_, _The Nymph and Fawn_, _A Drop of Dew_, _The Garden_, _The
Gallery_, _Upon the Hill and Grove at Billborow_. In this choice we may
see the hand of Charles Lamb, as Tennyson's may be noticed in the
selection made in Palgrave's _Golden Treasury_ (1863). Dean Trench in
his _Household Book of English Poetry_ (1869) gives _Eyes and Tears_,
the _Horatian Ode_, and _A Drop of Dew_. In Mr. Ward's _English Poets_
(1880) Marvell is represented by _The Garden_, _A Drop of Dew_, _The
Bermudas_, _Young Love_, the _Horatian Ode_, and the _Lines on Paradise
Lost_. Thanks to these later Anthologies and to the quotations from _The
Garden_ and _Upon Appleton House_ in the _Essays of Elia_, Marvell's
fame as a true poet has of recent years become widespread, and is now,
whatever vicissitudes it may have endured, well established.

As a satirist in rhyme Marvell has shared the usual and not undeserved
fate of almost all satirists of their age and fellow-men. The authors of
lines written in heat to give expression to the anger of the hour may
well be content if their effusions give the pain or teach the lesson
they were intended to give or teach. If you lash the age, you do so
presumably for the benefit of the age. It is very hard to transmit even
a fierce and genuine indignation from one age to another. Marvell's
satires were too hastily composed, too roughly constructed, too redolent
of the occasion, to enter into the kingdom of poetry. To the careful and
character-loving reader of history, particularly if he chance to have a
feeling for the House of Commons, not merely as an institution, but as a
place of resort, Marvell's satirical poems must always be intensely
interesting. They strike me as honest in their main intention, and never
very wide of the mark. Hallam says, in his lofty way, "We read with
nothing but disgust the satirical poetry of Cleveland, Butler, Oldham,
Marvell," and he adds, "Marvell's satires are gross and stupid."[231:1]
Gross they certainly occasionally are, but stupid they never are.
Marvell was far too well-informed a politician and too shrewd a man ever
to be stupid.

As a satirist Marvell had, if he wanted them, many models of style, but
he really needed none, for he just wrote down in rough-and-ready rhyme
whatever his head or his spleen suggested to his fancy. Every now and
again there is a noble outburst of feeling, and a couplet of great
felicity. I confess to taking great pleasure in Marvell's satires.

As a prose writer Marvell has many merits and one great fault. He has
fire and fancy and was the owner and master of a precise vocabulary well
fitted to clothe and set forth a well-reasoned and lofty argument. He
knew how to be both terse and diffuse, and can compress himself into a
line or expand over a paragraph. He has touches of a grave irony as well
as of a boisterous humour. He can tell an anecdote and elaborate a
parable. Swift, we know, had not only Butler's _Hudibras_ by heart, but
was also (we may be sure) a close student of Marvell's prose. His great
fault is a very common one. He is too long. He forgets how quickly a
reader grows tired. He is so interested in the evolutions of his own
mind that he forgets his audience. His interest at times seems as if it
were going to prove endless. It is the first business of an author to
arrest and then to retain the attention of the reader. To do this
requires great artifice.

Among the masters of English prose it would be rash to rank Marvell, who
was neither a Hooker nor a Taylor. None the less he was the owner of a
prose style which some people think the best prose style of all--that of
honest men who have something to say.

FOOTNOTES:

[229:1] "Indecently" is the doctor's own expression.

[231:1] See Hallam's _History of Literature_, vol. iv. pp. 433, 439.




INDEX


A

"_Account of the Growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government in England_,"
180-1, 187;
  quoted, 188.

Act of Uniformity, 143, 184.

Addison, 65.

Aitken, Mr., 47.

Amersham, 145.

Amsterdam, 59, 197.

Angier, Lord, 196.

_Appleton House_, 66.

Arlington, 185, 186.

_Ars Poetica_, 47.

Ashley, Lord, 120, 150, 185.

_Athenæ Oxonienses_, 10.

Aubrey, 222.

Austin, John, 159.

_Autobiography_ (Clarendon), 136.

_Autobiography of Matthew Robinson_, 11 _n._

Axtell, Lieut.-Colonel, 28, 29.


B

_Baker's Chronicle_, 80.

Baker, Thomas, 24.

Bampfield, Thomas, 80.

Banda Islands, 127.

Barbadoes, 58.

Barnard, Edward, 95.

Barron, Richard, 64.

Baxter, Richard, 52, 93, 179.

Bedford, 162.

Bench Books of Hull, 223.

Bennet, Sir John, 195.

Berkeley, Charles, 115.

Berkenhead, Sir John, 191.

_Bermudas, The_, 66, 225, 230.

Besant, Sir Walter, 118 _n._

Bill for "the Rebuilding of London," 123, 124, 125, 126 _n._;
  amended, 148.

Bill of Conventicles, 142, 146, 147, 148.

Bill of Subsidy, 193.

Bill of Test, 205.

Bill of Uniformity, 101.

"_Bind me, ye woodbines_," 227.

Blackheath, 188.

Blake, Admiral, 59, 69, 71, 75.

Blaydes, James, 6.

---- Joseph, 6.

_Blenheim_ (Addison), 70.

Blood, Colonel, 196.

Bodleian Library, 31, 116.

Boulter, Robert, 223.

Bowles, 229.

Bowyer, 64.

Boyle, Richard, 115.

Bradshaw, John, Lord-President of the Council, 28, 48, 52, 94, 95.

Braganza, Catherine of, 33.

_Bramhall Preface_, 162.

Breda, 88;
  Declaration, 102, 127, 136.

"_Britannia and Raleigh_," 216 _seq._

Brunswick, Duke of, 196.

Buckingham, Duke of, 150, 185, 196, 205, 206.

Bucknoll, Sir William, 195.

Bunyan, 162.

Burnet, Bishop, 3, 163.

Butler, 62 _n._, 154, 226.


C

"Cabal," 184.

Cadsand, 186.

Calamy, Edmund, 93, 94.

Cambridge, 48, 175.

Canary Islands, 70.

Canterbury, Prerogative Court of, 222.

Capel, 172.

Carey, Henry, 126 _n._

Carlisle, Lady, 113.

---- Lord, 101, 108, 113.

Carteret, Sir George (Treasurer of Navy), 120, 141, 143.

Castlemaine, Lady, 134.

_Character of Holland, The_, 60.

Charles I., 29, 167.

Charles II., 76, 80, 81, 90, 93, 95, 127, 182, 184, 185, 186, 188, 189,
195, 196, 203, 205, 206, 214, 222.

Chateaubriand, 24.

Chatham, 128.

Cherry Burton, 6.

_Choice_ (Pomfret), 225.

_Chronicle_ (Cowley), 227.

Chute, Chaloner, 80.

Civil War, 23, 219.

Clare, Lord, 193, 195.

Clarendon, Earl of, 28, 52, 77, 82;
  _History_, 88, 114, 120;
  _Life_, 129, 134, 135, 136, 138, 148 _n._

Cleveland, Duke of, 226.

---- Duchess of, 196.

Clifford, 154, 185, 186.

Clifford's Inn, 125.

Cole, William, 5.

_Collection of Poems on Affairs of State_, 35.

_Complete Works in Verse and Prose of Andrew Marvell, M.P., The_, 8.

Conventicle Act, 144.

Convention Parliament, 87, 91, 95.

Cooke, Thomas, 229.

Cooper, 219.

Copenhagen, 113.

Cosin, Dr., Bishop of Durham, 94, 148.

Cotton, Charles, 226.

Council of Trent, 178.

Court of Chancery, 125.

Coventry, Sir John, 191.

Cowley, 226.

Crew, Bishop of Durham, 202.

_Critic_ (Sheridan), 154.

Cromwell, Oliver, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 59, 60, 63, 64, 68, 73, 75, 77,
89, 92, 93, 94, 95, 127, 137, 140, 145, 215, 219.

---- Lord Richard, 77, 79, 80, 81.

---- the Lady Mary, 71.


D

Danby, Lord-Treasurer, 209, 228.

_Daphne and Chloe_, 229.

Dartmouth, Lord (Colonel Legge), 141 _n._

Davies, T., 229.

"_Debate on Mr. Andrew Marvell's striking Sir Philip Harcourt,
March 29_," etc., 212.

Declaration of Indulgence, 187, 188.

Declaration of War, The, 187.

_Defence and Continuation of Ecclesiastical Politie, A_ (Parker), 153.

_Defensio Secunda pro populo Anglicano_ (Milton), 48.

Denham, Sir John, 27, 129, 226.

De Ruyter, 115, 128, 136.

"_Description of Holland, A_" (Butler), 62.

De Witt, John, 63, 187, 197.

_Dialogue between two horses, Charles I. at Charing Cross, and
Charles II. at Wool Church_, 218, 219.

_Dictionary of National Biography_, 9, 210 _n._

_Directions to a Painter_ (Denham), 129.

Directory of Public Worship, 90, 103.

_Discourse by Way of Vision concerning the Government of Oliver
Cromwell_ (quoted), 73, 92.

_Discourse concerning Government_ (Sidney), 64.

"_Discourse of Ecclesiastical Politie wherein the Authority of the
Civil Magistrate over the Consciences of Subjects in matters of
external Religion is asserted_," etc., 153.

Donne, Dr., 226, 227.

_Don Quixote_ (Shelton's translation), 78.

Dorset, 226.

Dort, 187.

Dover, 90.

_Drama Commonplaces_, 154.

_Drop of Dew, A_, 230.

Dryden, John, 20, 24, 27, 69, 130.

Dublin Castle, 196.

_Dunciad_, 21.

Dunkirk, 127, 137, 193, 215.

Dutch War, 126.

Dutton, Mr. (Cromwell's ward), 54.


E

East India Company, 127.

_Ecclesiastical Politie_ (quoted), 157-8, 159-60.

Edgar, Prince, 196.

Elizabeth (Queen), 143.

"Employment of my Solitude, The" (Fairfax), 32.

"England's Way to Win Wealth," 56;
  quoted, 56, 57, 58.

Erith, 139.

_Essays of Elia_, 230.

Eton College, 51.

Evelyn, John, 19, 121, 138, 139 _n._

_Eyes and Tears_, 225, 230.


F

Fagg, Sir John, 205.

Fairfax, Lady Mary, 27, 28, 32, 63.

---- Lord, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 48, 50, 63.

---- Sir William, 33, 36.

Fanshaw, Sir Richard, 49 _n._

Fauconberg, Lady, 95.

---- Viscount (afterwards Earl), 71.

Finch, Sir Heneage, 91, 224.

_First Anniversary of the Government under His Highness the
Lord-Protector, The_, 60.

Five Mile Act, 117, 162, 203.

_Flagellum Parliamentum_, 97.

Flanders, 196.

Flecknoe, Richard, 20, 21.

France, 183, 184, 197, 204.

"_Free Impartial Censure of the Platonick Philosophy, A_"
(Parker), 152 _n._, 174.

French Alliance, 188.


G

_Gallery, The_, 230.

"Garden Poetry," 75.

_Garden, The_, 66, 225.

Gee, Dr., 220.

Gilbey. Colonel, 95, 98, 101.

Gillingham, 127.

Gladstone, 23, 104 _n._

_Golden Remains_ (Hales), 51.

_Golden Treasury_ (1863), (Palgrave), 230.

Gombroon, 194.

_Government of the People of England_, etc. (Parker), 172.

Green, Mr., 222.

Grosart, Mr., 7, 65, 84, 85, 106, 165-9 _n._, 176 _n._, 178 _n._,
181 _n._, 187 _n._, 204-6 _n._, 209 _n._, 223.

Grosvenor, Colonel, 219.

_Growth of Popery_ (quoted), 203, 206.


H

Hague, The, 197.

Hale, Sir Matthew, 92, 125.

Hales, John, 51.

Hallam, 231.

Hamilton, 172.

Harding, Dean, 118.

Harrington, James, 76, 222.

Harrison, 29, 30.

Harwich, 115.

Hastings, Lord Henry, 27.

Hazlitt, 61, 239.

Herrick, 27.

_His Majesty's most Gracious Speech to Both Houses of Parliament_, 200.

_Historical Dictionary_ (Jeremy Collier), 24 _n._

_History of England_ (Ranke), 59, 183, 185 _n._

_History of His Own Time_ (Burnet), 129, 136, 152 _n._, 189 _n._

_History of His Own Time_ (Parker), 96 _n._, 170 _n._

_History of Literature_ (Hallam), 231 _n._

_History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England, The_, 136.

Hobbes, 11, 12, 156, 157.

Holland, 120, 135, 182-4, 186, 197.

---- Lord, 172.

Hollis, Thomas, 64, 219.

_Holy Dying_, 151.

_Horatian Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland_, 63, 66, 225, 229, 230.

_Hortus_ (quoted), 45-6.

_Household Book of English Poetry_ (1809) (Dean Trench), 230.

Houses of Convocation, 101.

Howard, Sir Robert, 195.

_Hudibras_ (Butler), 231.

Hull, 2, 5, 8, 17, 18, 50, 59, 84, 95, 98, 99, 101, 209, 223, 224;
  Town Hall, 224.

_Hull, History of_ (Gent), 17.

Humber, The, 99.

Hyde, Mrs., 202.

---- Sir Edward (Earl of Clarendon), 49 _n._


I

Imposition upon wines, 196.

Indies, East and West, 93.

Inigo Jones, 221-2.

_Insolence and Impudence Triumphant_, 153.

Ireland, 122, 196, 209.

Irish Cattle Bill, 122.


J

Jessopp, Mr., 120.

Johnson, Dr., 225, 227.

"Johnson's _Poets_," 229.


K

Kremlin, 108.


L

Lamb, William, 20, 61.

Lambert, General, 29, 31, 82.

Lambeth, 175.

_Last Instructions to a Painter about the Dutch Wars, The_, 129;
  quoted, 130 _seq._, 135.

Laud, Archbishop, 91, 167, 221.

Lauderdale, Lord, 150, 185, 201, 202.

Lawson, Admiral, 115.

Lenthall, Speaker, 81, 83.

"Letter from a Parliament Man to his Friend" (Shaftesbury), 97.

_Leviathan_ (Hobbes), 156.

_Life of the Great Lord Fairfax_ (Markham) (quoted), 31.

_Lines on Paradise Lost_, 230.

Locke, John, 6, 179.

London, 90;
  Great Fire of, 17, 119, 209;
  Great Plague of, 115, 116, 119.

Lort, Dr. (Master of Trinity), 10.

Louis XIV., 183, 185, 186, 188, 189, 193, 196, 215.

Lovelace, Richard, 25, 26, 227.

_Lucasta_, 25, 26.


M

Macaulay, 70, 92.

"MacFlecknoe" (quoted), 21.

Manton, Dr., 162.

_Mariæ Marvell relictæ et Johni Greni Creditori_, 222.

Marlborough, Earl of, 115.

Martin Marprelate, 24.

Marvell, Andrew, born 1621, 4;
  ancestry, 4-5;
  Hull Grammar School, 8;
  school days, 8-9;
  goes to Trinity College, Cambridge, 10;
  life at Cambridge, 11-12;
  becomes a Roman Catholic, 12;
  recantation and return to Trinity, 14;
  life at Cambridge ends, 17;
  death of mother, 17;
  abroad in France, Spain, Holland, and Italy, 19;
  acquainted with French, Dutch, and Spanish languages, 19;
  poet, parliamentarian, and controversialist, 20;
  in Rome (1645), 20;
  invites Flecknoe to dinner, 22;
  neither a Republican nor a Puritan, 23;
  a Protestant and a member of the Reformed Church of England, 23;
  stood for both King and Parliament, 23;
  considered by Collier a dissenter, 24 _n._;
  civil servant during Commonwealth, 24;
  rejoices at Restoration, 25;
  keeps Royalist company (1646-50), 25;
  contributes commendatory lines to Richard Lovelace in poems published
    1649, 25;
  defends Lovelace, 26;
  loved to be alone with his friends, lived for the most part in a hired
    lodging, 26;
  one of thirty-three poets who wept for the early death of Lord H.
    Hastings, 27;
  went to live with Lord Fairfax at Nunappleton House as tutor to only
    child and daughter of the house (1650), 27;
  anonymity of verses, 34;
  small volume containing "The Garden Poetry" (1681), 34;
  tells story of Nunappleton House, 36-45;
  applies to Secretary for Foreign Tongues for a testimonial, 48;
  recommended by Milton to Bradshaw for post of Latin Secretary, 50;
  appointed four years later, 51:
  frequently visits Eton, 51;
  Milton intrusts him with a letter and copy of _Secunda defensio_ to
    Bradshaw, 52;
  appointed by the Lord-Protector tutor to Mr. Dutton, 54;
  resides with Oxenbridges, 54;
  letters, 53, 54-5, 85-7, 92-3, 94-6, 99, 100-1, 104, 105, 109-12, 121,
    122, 140, 141-3, 145-7, 148-50, 189-91, 191 _seq._, 210;
  begins his career as anonymous political poet and satirist (1653), 56;
  dislike of the Dutch, 56;
  impregnated with the new ideas about sea power, 59;
  reported to have been among crowd which witnessed Charles I.'s death, 64;
  first collected edition of works, verse and prose, produced by
    subscription in three volumes, 64;
  became Milton's assistant (1657), 68;
  friendship with Milton, 69;
  takes Milton's place in receptions at foreign embassies, 69;
  plays part of Laureate during Protector's life, 71;
  produces two songs on marriage of Lady Mary Cromwell, 72-3;
  attends Cromwell's funeral, 73;
  is keenly interested in public affairs, 75;
  becomes a civil servant for a year, 75;
  M.P. for Hull, 75;
  friend of Milton and Harrington, 76;
  well disposed towards Charles II., 77;
  remains in office till end of year (1659), 77;
  elected with Ramsden M.P. for Kingston-upon-Hull, 78;
  attended opening of Parliament (1659), 80;
  is not a "Rumper," 84;
  again elected for Hull (1660), 84;
  begins his remarkable correspondence with the Corporation of Hull, 84;
  a satirist, not an enthusiast, 85;
  lines on Restoration, 90;
  complains to House of exaction of £150 for release of Milton, 91;
  elected for third, and last, time member for Hull, 95;
  receives fee from Corporation of Hull for attendance at House, 96;
  reviled by Parker for taking this payment, 96;
  _Flagellum Parliamentum_ attributed to, 97;
  goes to Holland, 100;
  is recalled, 101;
  while in Holland writes to Trinity House and to the Corporation of Hull
    on business matters, 101;
  goes as secretary to Lord Carlisle on an embassy to Sweden and
    Denmark, 106;
  public entry into Moscow, 108;
  assists at formal reception of Lord Carlisle as English ambassador, 109;
  renders oration to Czar into Latin, 109;
  Russians object to terms of oration, 109;
  replies, 109-12;
  returns from  embassy, 113;
  reaches London, 113;
  attends Parliament at Oxford, 116;
  _The Last Instructions to a Painter about the Dutch Wars_, 129-35;
  bitter enemy of Hyde, 136;
  lines upon Clarendon House, 138;
  inquires into "miscarriages of the late war," 139;
  _The Rehearsal Transprosed_, 151;
  its great success, 152;
  literary method described by Parker, 162;
  called "a droll," "a buffoon," 163;
  replies to Parker, 163 _seq._;
  intercedes, 168;
  abused by Parker in _History of His Own Time_, 170 _n._;
  _The Rehearsall Transpros'd_ (second part), 171-2;
  pictures Parker, 172 _seq._;
  latterly fears subversion of Protestant faith, 179;
  his famous pamphlet, _An Account of the Growth of Popery and Arbitrary
    Government in England_, 180-1, 203-5, 206-8;
  gives account of quarrel with Dutch, 186-7;
  commendatory verses on "_Mr. Milton's Paradise Lost_" (1674), 199 _n._;
  mock speech, _His Majesty's Most Gracious Speech to Both Houses of
    Parliament_, 200-2;
  story of proffered bribe, 209-10;
  last letter to constituents, 210;
  rarely speaks in the House of Commons, 211;
  longest reported speech, 211;
  speech reported in _Parliamentary History_ (1677), 211;
  "_Debate on Mr. Andrew Marvell's striking Sir Philip Harcourt_,"
    etc., 212-14;
  friend of Prince Rupert, 214;
  lines on setting up of king's statue, 214-15;
  "Britannia and Raleigh," 216-19;
  dies, 219;
  thought to have been poisoned, 219;
  this suspicion dissipated, 220;
  account of sickness and death, 220-1;
  burial, 221;
  obsequies, 223;
  epitaph, 221;
  humour and wit, 163;
  not a fanatic, 179;
  insatiable curiosity, 182;
  power of self-repression, 211;
  as poet, 225-30;
  as satirist, 228, 230-1;
  as prose writer, 231-2;
  love of gardens, 227;
  appearance described, 232;
  Hull's most famous member, 223;
  enemies, 224;
  portraits of, 224;
  statue of, 224;
  editions of works, 229.

Marvell, Rev. Andrew (father), 7.

---- Mary (wife), 3, 222-3.

"Marvell's Cottage," 223 _n._

_Marvell's Ghost_ (in _Poems on Affairs of State_), 220 _n._

May, 119.

Mead, William, 191.

Meadows, Philip, 51, 54.

Medway, 139, 187.

_Memorials_ (Whitelock), 29.

Milton, John, 2, 19, 20, 21, 48, 49, 52, 64, 68, 69, 73, 76, 77, 91,
129, 151, 199, 223, 226, 228.

Monk, General, Duke of Albemarle, 80, 83, 91, 128, 139, 140.

---- Dr., Provost of Eton. 94.

Monmouth, Duke of, 116, 191.

Monument ("tall bully"), 118.

More (Moore), Thomas, 7.

More, Robert, 6.

Morpeth, Lord, 113.

Moscow, 105, 107.

"Mr. Milton's Paradise Lost" (Marvell), 199 _n._

_Musa Cantabrigiensis_, 16.

Muskerry, Lord, 115.


N

Napoleon, 24.

_Narrative of the Restoration_ (Collins), 81.

National Portrait Gallery, 224.

Navigation Act, 59, 63.

Nettleton, Robert, 64;
  (Marvell's grand-nephew), 221.

New Amsterdam, 136.

New Guinea, 127.

Novgorod, 113.

Nunappleton House, 63.

_Nymph and Fawn, The_, 230.

_Nymph complaining for the Death of her Fawn, The_, 225.


O

Oaths Bill, 202, 205.

_Oceana_ (James Harrington), 222.

_Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland, The_, 34.

_Omniana_ (Southey), 20 _n._

Opdam, Admiral, 115, 129.

Orleans, Duchess of, 185.

Ormond, Duke of, 196.

Orrery, 150.

Owen, Dr. John, 81.

Oxenbridge, John, 51.

Oxford, 116.


P

_Paradise Lost_, 10, 52, 69, 91.

_Paradise Regained_, 91.

Parker, Dr. Samuel, 9, 151-3, 155, 157, 159-60, 162-3, 167, 171-2, 211.

_Parliamentary History_, 211.

Paston, Sir Robert, 114.

Pattison, Mark, _Essays_, 230.

Peak, Sir William, 215.

Pease, Anne, 6.

Pelican (Inn), 21.

Pell, J., D.D., 222.

Pembroke, Earl of, 202.

Penderel, Richard, 222.

Penn, William, 191.

Pensionary or Long Parliament, 95, 96, 135.

Pepys, Samuel, 69, 90, 95, 96, 113, 117, 118, 120, 121;
  _Diary_, 129.

Pett, Mr. Commissioner, 133.

"Petty Navy Royal" (Dee), 56;
  (quoted), 57, 58.

Pickering, Sir Gilbert, 69.

_Pilgrim's Progress, The_, 158.

Plymouth, 136.

"_Poem upon the Death of his late Highness the Protector, A_," 74.

_Poems_ (1081), 223.

_Poems and Satires of Andrew Marvell_, 47 _n._

_Poems on Affairs of State_, 228.

Poleroone, 127, 136.

"_Politic Plat (plan) for the Honour of the Prince, A_," 56.

Poll Bill, 122.

Ponder, Nathaniel, 171.

Pope, 34, 130, 229.

Popish Plot, 219.

Popple, Edmund, 6.

---- William, 6.

_Portland Papers_, 116 _n._

Portsmouth, 136.

Pride, Colonel, 94.

Prince of Orange, 63.

Prynne, 96.

{Greek: Pyretologia} (Richard Morton), 220.


Q

Quarles, 226.


R

Ramsden, John, 78, 84, 95.

---- William. 189, 210.

_Rehearsal_ (Duke of Buckingham), 154;
  quoted, 154-5.

_Rehearsal Transprosed, The_ (quoted), 23-4, 51 _n._, 151, 152n., 162;
  (second part), 171;
  quoted, 172-8, 211.

_Religio Laici_, 24 _n._

_Reproof to the Rehearsal Transprosed_ (quoted), 162, 168, 169 _seq._

Reynolds, Dr., Bishop of Norwich, 93.

Riga, 113.

Robinson, Matthew, 11.

Rochester, Earl of, 226.

Rome, 193.

Roos Divorce Bill, 148, 149.

"Rota" Club, 3, 76.

Rouen, 139, 139 _n._

_Royal Charles, The_, 115, 136.

Rump Parliament, 81, 82, 83.

Rupert, Prince, 3, 214.

Rushworth, 28.


S

St. Giles's Church in the Fields, 221.

St. John, Oliver, 51.

_Saint's Rest_ (Baxter), 151.

_Samson Agonistes_, 91.

Santa Cruz, 69.

Savoy Conference, 90, 101, 103, 104.

Scotland, 204.

Scroggs, Lord Chief Justice, 100.

_Secunda defensio_, 52.

_Select Poets_ (Hazlitt), 230.

Shadwell, 20, 21.

Shaftesbury, Earl of, 205.

Sharp, Archbishop, 224.

Sheerness, 127, 128, 136.

Sheldon, Dr., Archbishop of Canterbury, 153.

Shirley (dramatist), 118, 222.

Shrewsbury, Lady, 196.

Sidney Sussex College, 219.

Skinner, Mrs., 18.

Skynner, Mr., 54.

Sluys, 186.

Smith, Mr. Goldwin, 123 _n._

Sobieski, John, 214.

_Social England Illustrated_, 56 _n._

Solemn League and Covenant, 29.

_Song of Agincourt_ (Drayton), 70.

Southampton, Lord, 95, 203.

Southey, 226.

Spain, 183, 184.

Specimens (Campbell), 230.

_Specimens_ of Early English Poets (Mr. George Ellis), 229.

_State Trials_, 191.

Sterne, Bishop of Carlisle, 94.

Stockholm, 113.

Surat, 113, 194.

Surinam, 187.

Sutton, Mrs., 202.

Swift, Benjamin, 152, 231. {Transcriber's note: Referred to by surname
                            only in the text. Probably means Jonathan.}


T

_Table Talk_ (Selden), 179.

Tait, Archbishop, 23.

Temple, Sir William, 183.

_Tender Conscience_, 161;
  quoted, 161-2.

_Tentamina Physico-Theologica_ (Parker), 174.

Test Bill, 188.

Texel, 127.

Thompson, Captain Edward, 10, 64, 68, 73, 84, 202 _n._, 221, 223, 224, 229.

Thurloe, John, 50, 52.

_To his Coy Mistress_, 66, 225, 230.

Torbay, 136.

Tower, The, 206.

_Travels and Voyages_ (Harris), 106.

_Treatise on Education_ (Milton), 9.

"Treatise on the breeding of the Horse," 32.

Treaty of Dover, 184, 150 _n._, 186.

Treby, George, M.P., 219.

Trench, Dean, 67 _n._

Trevor, 150.

Trinity Church, Hull, 223.

---- College, Cambridge, 10.

---- House, 100.

Triple Alliance, The, 183, 184, 186.

Trot, Sir John, 197.

_True Greatness of Kingdoms and Estates, The_ (Bacon), 60.

_Truth and Innocence Vindicated_ (Owen), 153.

Turner, Sir Edward, 135.


U

_Unreformed House of Commons, The_ (Porritt), 96 _n._

Upnor Castle, 128.

"Upon His House," 138.

_Upon Appleton House_, 230.

_Upon the Hill and Grove of Billborow_, 230.

Urquhart, Sir Thomas, 89.


V

Vane, Sir Harry, 89.

Van Tromp, 59, 61, 63, 115.

Vere, Lord, 32.

Villiers, George, Duke of Buckingham, 33.

Viner, Sir Robert, 214, 215.

Virginia, 58.


W

Walcheren, 186.

Walker, 226.

Waller, 73, 144, 145 _n._, 226.

"Walton's _Life_" (Wotton), 19;
  quoted, 20.

Ward, Seth, 153 _n._  {Transcriber's Note: 152}

Watts, Dr., 65.

Weckerlin, Georg Rudolph, 49;
  Latin Secretary to Parliament, 49 _n._, 50.

Welch, Mr., 210.

Westminster Hall, 140.

---- Parliament of, 83.

White, Bishop of Ely, 13.

Whitehall, 117.

Whitelock's _Memorials_, 29.

_William and Margaret_ (Mallet), 65.

Wine Licenses, 196.

Winestead, 4.

Wise, Lieutenant, 140.

Wither, 226.

Wood, Anthony, 25.

Wordsworth, 229.

Worshipful Society of Masters and Pilots of Trinity House, 84.


Y

Yarmouth, 58.

York, Duchess of, 193, 196.

---- Duke of, 115, 188, 189.

_Young Love_, 225, 229, 230.




ENGLISH MEN OF LETTERS


Edited by JOHN MORLEY
Cloth 12mo 75 cents net, each

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGE ELIOT. By Leslie Stephen.

WILLIAM HAZLITT. By Augustine Birrell.

MATTHEW ARNOLD. By Herbert W. Paul.

JOHN RUSKIN. By Frederic Harrison.

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER. By Thomas W. Higginson.

ALFRED TENNYSON. By Alfred Lyall.

SAMUEL RICHARDSON. By Austin Dobson.

ROBERT BROWNING. By G.K. Chesterton.

CRABBE. By Alfred Ainger.

FANNY BURNEY. By Austin Dobson.

JEREMY TAYLOR. By Edmund Gosse.

ROSSETTI. By Arthur C. Benson.

MARIA EDGEWORTH. By the Hon. Emily Lawless.

HOBBES. By Leslie Stephen.

ADAM SMITH. By Francis W. Hirst.

THOMAS MOORE. By Stephen Gwynn.

SYDNEY SMITH. By George W.E. Russell.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT. By William A. Bradley.

WILLIAM HICKLING PRESCOTT. By Harry Thurston Peck.

EDWARD FITZGERALD. By A.C. Benson.

ANDREW MARVELL. By Augustine Birrell.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York




ENGLISH MEN OF LETTERS


Edited by JOHN MORLEY

The earlier issues of this series are also to be had conveniently bound
in twelve uniform volumes.

Cloth. $1.00 per volume

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAUCER. By Adolphus William Ward.
SPENSER. By R.W. Church.
DRYDEN. By George Saintsbury.

MILTON. By Mark Pattison, B.D.
GOLDSMITH. By William Black.
COWPER. By Goldwin Smith.

BYRON. By John Nichol.
SHELLEY. By John Addington Symonds.
KEATS. By Sidney Colvin, M.A.

WORDSWORTH. By F.W.H. Myers.
SOUTHEY. By Edward Dowden.
LANDOR. By Sidney Colvin, M.A.

LAMB. By Alfred Ainger.
ADDISON. By W.J. Courthope.
SWIFT. By Leslie Stephen.

SCOTT. By Richard H. Hutton.
BURNS. By Principal Shairp.
COLERIDGE. By H.D. Traill.

HUME. By T.H. Huxley, F.R.S.
LOCKE. By Thomas Fowler.
BURKE. By John Morley.

FIELDING. By Austin Dobson.
THACKERAY. By Anthony Trollope.
DICKENS. By Adolphus William Ward.

GIBBON. By J. Cotter Morison.
CARLYLE. By John Nichol.
MACAULAY. By J. Cotter Morison.

SIDNEY. By J.A. Symonds.
DE QUINCEY.  By David Masson.
SHERIDAN. By Mrs. Oliphant.

POPE. By Leslie Stephen.
JOHNSON. By Leslie Stephen.
GRAY. By Edmund Gosse.

BACON. By R.W. Church.
BUNYAN. By J.A. Froude.
BENTLEY. By R.C. Jebb.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York




ENGLISH MEN OF LETTERS


Edited by JOHN MORLEY
Cloth 12mo 40 cents each

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDISON. By W.J. Courthope.
BACON. By R.W. Church.
BENTLEY. By Prof. Jebb.
BUNYAN. By J.A. Froude.
BURKE. By John Morley.
BURNS. By Principal Shairp.
BYRON. By Prof. Nichol.
CARLYLE. By Prof. Nichol.
CHAUCER. By Prof. A.W. Ward.
COLERIDGE. By H.D. Traill.
COWPER. By Goldwin Smith.
DEFOE. By W. Minto.
DE QUINCEY. By Prof. Masson.
DICKENS. By A.W. Ward.
DRYDEN. By G. Saintsbury.
FIELDING. By Austin Dobson.
GIBBON. By J. Cotter Morison.
GOLDSMITH. By William Black.
GRAY. By Edmund Gosse.
JOHNSON. By Leslie Stephen.
HUME. By T.H. Huxley.
KEATS. By Sidney Colvin.
LAMB. By Alfred Ainger.
LANDOR. By Sidney Colvin.
LOCKE. By Prof. Fowler.
MACAULAY. By J. Cotter Morison.
MILTON. By Mark Pattison.
POPE. By Leslie Stephen.
SCOTT. By R.H. Hutton.
SHELLEY. By J.A. Symonds.
SHERIDAN. By Mrs. Oliphant.
SIR PHILIP SIDNEY. By J.A. Symonds.
SOUTHEY. By Prof. Dowden.
SPENSER. By R.W. Church.
STERNE. By H.D. Traill.
SWIFT. By Leslie Stephen.
THACKERAY. By A. Trollope.
WORDSWORTH. By F.W.H. Myers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The MacMillan Company
64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANDREW MARVELL***


******* This file should be named 17388-8.txt or 17388-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/3/8/17388



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, Father Thrift and His Animal Friends, by
Joseph Charles Sindelar, Illustrated by Helen Geraldine Hodge


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Father Thrift and His Animal Friends


Author: Joseph Charles Sindelar



Release Date: July 23, 2013  [eBook #43287]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL
FRIENDS***


E-text prepared by David Edwards, Matthew Wheaton, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the lovely original illustrations.
      See 43287-h.htm or 43287-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/43287/43287-h/43287-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/43287/43287-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/fatherthrift00sind





FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL FRIENDS

by

JOSEPH C. SINDELAR

Author of
The Nixie Bunny Books

With Pictures by Helen Geraldine Hodge







Beckley-Cardy Company
Chicago


       *       *       *       *       *

    BOOKS BY JOSEPH C. SINDELAR
    BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW (Craik-Sindelar). Illustrated in colors.
    NIXIE BUNNY IN MANNERS-LAND. Illustrated in colors.
    NIXIE BUNNY IN WORKADAY-LAND. Illustrated in colors.
    NIXIE BUNNY IN HOLIDAY-LAND. Illustrated in colors.
    NIXIE BUNNY IN FARAWAY-LANDS. Illustrated in colors.
    FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL FRIENDS. Illustrated in black and color.
    MORNING EXERCISES FOR ALL THE YEAR.
    BEST MEMORY GEMS.
    BRIGHT ENTERTAINMENTS FOR CHRISTMAS.
    THE BEST THANKSGIVING BOOK.
    THE BEST CHRISTMAS BOOK.
    MERRY CHRISTMAS ENTERTAINMENTS.
    CLOSING DAY ENTERTAINMENTS.

       *       *       *       *       *


Copyright, 1918, by Joseph C. Sindelar
All Rights Reserved

Printed in the United States of America




    To
    Joseph C. Jr.
    and
    his friends




CONTENTS


   PAGE

   The Queer Little Old Man                 11
   The Little Old Man Decides               17
   His First Day in the Forest              23
   Great Gray Owl                           29
   The Animals of the Forest                35
   What Made the Bear Sick                  41
   How the Woodpeckers Helped               47
   The Busy Beavers                         53
   The Gray Foxes and the Red Foxes         59
   Red Squirrel and Bunny Cottontail        65
   Shaggy Bear's Mistake                    71
   The Sweetest Thing in the Forest         77
   Robins, Crows, and Blackbirds            85
   The Little Raindrops                     91
   Trouble in the Forest                    97
   Two Bad Boys                            103
   The Boys and the Birds                  109
   Insects and Worms                       115
   After Many Days                         123



Rudolph argues that after a false start in trying to emulate the English in an attempt to overcome his timidity, Gandhi discovered the inner courage he was seeking by helping his countrymen in South Africa. The new courage consisted of observing the traditional Bengali way of "self-suffering" and, in finding his own courage, he was enabled also to point out the way of 'Satyagraha' and 'ahimsa' to the whole of India.[194] Gandhi's writings expressed four meanings of freedom: as India's national independence; as individual political freedom; as group freedom from poverty; and as the capacity for personal self-rule.[195]
Gandhi was a self-described philosophical anarchist,[196] and his vision of India meant an India without an underlying government.[197] He once said that "the ideally nonviolent state would be an ordered anarchy."[198] While political systems are largely hierarchical, with each layer of authority from the individual to the central government have increasing levels of authority over the layer below, Gandhi believed that society should be the exact opposite, where nothing is done without the consent of anyone, down to the individual. His idea was that true self-rule in a country means that every person rules his or herself and that there is no state which enforces laws upon the people.[199]
This would be achieved over time with nonviolent conflict mediation, as power is divested from layers of hierarchical authorities, ultimately to the individual, which would come to embody the ethic of nonviolence. Rather than a system where rights are enforced by a higher authority, people are self-governed by mutual responsibilities. On returning from South Africa, when Gandhi received a letter asking for his participation in writing a world charter for human rights, he responded saying, "in my experience, it is far more important to have a charter for human duties."[200]
A free India did not mean merely transferring the established British administrative structure into Indian hands. He warned, "you would make India English. And when it becomes English, it will be called not Hindustan but Englishtan. This is not the Swaraj I want."[201] Tewari argues that Gandhi saw democracy as more than a system of government; it meant promoting both individuality and the self-discipline of the community. Democracy was a moral system that distributed power and assisted the development of every social class, especially the lowest. It meant settling disputes in a nonviolent manner; it required freedom of thought and expression. For Gandhi, democracy was a way of life.[202]


Introduction


    As from the days your father's father knew,
    This little story book now comes to you.
    So when you turn its pages, heed them well:
    Though strange the stories, many truths they tell.

    They tell of animals and birds and trees,
    Of children, flowers, and honeybees;
    Of a queer old man, and a quaint old town
    With crooked streets that ran up and down.

    They tell of these and many, many more.
    Still, this I'd add to what has gone before:
    In the wood there grows a tree--the thrifty tree--
    As wonderful as anything can be!

    Its trunk is copper; silver are its leaves;
    Its blossoms from bright golden threads it weaves;
    Its fruit is health and wealth and honest joy--
    So seek this goodly tree, wise girl and boy.




FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL FRIENDS




THE QUEER LITTLE OLD MAN


Once upon a time, in a quaint old town, there lived a queer little old
man. His name was Thrift--Father Thrift people called him, although he
really was no father at all.

As I said before, he was just a queer little old man. He had no wife,
no children, no home of his own.

But he had a kind heart within his queer little body. Also, he had
willing hands and feet, and these brought him many friends.

How old the queer little man was, or how long he had lived in the
quaint old town, no one seemed to know.

The present grandfathers and grandmothers remembered how the queer
little man used to take them, as children, on his lap and tell them
stories.

He had told the same stories to their children and to their children's
children. Yet to none of them did he look any different to-day than he
did when they first saw him.

You must not think that telling stories was all the queer little old
man had to do. He was a sort of all-round village helper. He helped
everybody who needed help.

But it was for his good advice that the queer little old man was most
sought. He always thought well for everybody, and the people profited
by following his teaching.

Sita (also spelled Seeta or Seetha Hindustani pronunciation: [sītā],  listen (help·info) meaning "furrow") is the central female character of the Hindu epic Ramayana.[1][2] She is the consort of the Hindu god Rama (avatar of Vishnu) and is an avatar of Lakshmi, goddess of wealth and wife of Vishnu. She is esteemed as a standard-setter for wifely and womanly virtues for all Hindu women.[3] Sita is known for her dedication, self-sacrifice, courage and purity.
Sita is described as the daughter of the earth goddess Bhūmi and the adopted daughter of King Janaka of Mithila and Queen Sunayna. In her youth, she marries Rama, the prince of Ayodhya. Soon after her marriage, she is forced into exile with her husband and brother-in-law Lakshmana. While in exile, the trio settle in the Dandaka forest, from where she is abducted by the Ravana, Rakshasa King of Lanka. She is imprisoned in the Ashoka Vatika of Lanka by Ravana. Sita is finally rescued by Rama in the climatic war where Rama slays Ravana. Sita proves her chastity by undergoing a trial by fire. Thereafter, Rama and Sita return to Ayodhya, where they are crowned as king and queen. However, Rama abandons a pregnant Sita, when one of his subjects casts doubt over her chastity. In the refuge of Sage Valmiki's hermitage Sita gives birth to twins Lava and Kusha. After her sons grow up and unite with their father, Sita returns to her mother, the Earth's womb for release from a cruel world.


In fact, the whole town grew prosperous, _extremely_ prosperous, by
heeding Father Thrift's advice.

You would suppose that the queer little old man would be well
rewarded.

Not so! For when these people became very, _very_ prosperous, they
felt that the queer little old man was only in their way.

What further need had they of his advice?

He had taught them to live simply, to spend wisely, and to waste
nothing. He had taught them to enjoy simple pleasures and to form
simple habits.

"Of what good is time or money, body or brain, if we do not know how
to use any of them?" he would say.

"What will become of good health if we do not take care of it?

"Of what good is study-time or play-time unless we get the most we can
out of it?

"Or of what worth is life itself if we waste it?"

But the townspeople would not listen to him now. Young Mr. Spendthrift
had come to town and they followed him. They only laughed at Father
Thrift.

"Poor, queer old man!" they said. "He must be out of his head."

And they began to spend money foolishly, and to waste their time and
their health as well as their money.

_How_ it grieved the queer little old man to see things go so!

Day after day he would sit with his head in his hands, thinking,
thinking, _thinking_. (He liked to think even better than most people
like to eat.)

Then one day, after he had sat for a long, long time thinking, he got
up and exclaimed: "At last, at last I have it! I'm sure I have it,
this time. Yes, I'm sure."

And those who heard the queer little old man said: "Just as we told
you. Poor fellow, he's out of his head! Some of the wheels up here
have gotten badly out of order." And they pointed to their foreheads.

But the old man heard them not. Or if he heard he lost no sleep on
account of what they said.




THE LITTLE OLD MAN DECIDES


The next day the whole town was busy--very busy--gossiping. Everybody
told everybody else what the queer little old man had been overheard
to say.

But where was the little old man?

Now that they thought of it, who had seen him since the night before?

Nobody!

Where could he be? Had he dropped through a crack in the floor, his
disappearance could not have been more sudden or more complete.

Every one was excited. It was not that the town cared particularly
about the queer little old man. It was not that, at all. Only the
people were curious to learn where he could have gone or what could
have happened to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leading from the town was a crooked road that was traveled but little.
At the end of the road was a great forest where there lived many
animals and birds.

Had any of the townspeople been up very, very early on the morning
that the queer little old man disappeared, they need not have been so
excited.

For on that morning a bent little figure might have been seen trudging
along the crooked road leading toward the forest.

The man was dressed poorly, almost shabbily. He walked slowly, and
seemed to be deep in thought.

Over his shoulder he carried a cane. From it hung a bag made of a big
red figured handkerchief.

Apparently the man was on a journey, and the big red figured
handkerchief was his traveling bag.

The fat, round-faced Moon Man smiled down from his home in the sky at
the little figure in the road. His mouth seemed to move, and I am sure
he was saying:

"Go, brave little old man. Go where you've decided to go.

"If you are going to the forest, you will no doubt find a welcome
there. Some animals and birds are better as friends than are some
people.

"Anyway, the great forest is in need of your lessons. I will light the
way for you. May the good spirits attend you!"

And in the stillness of the early morning the queer little old man of
the quaint old town might have been heard to answer:

"So I have decided. Come what may, I shall be satisfied.

"Thank you, kind Moon Man, for your good wishes and for your bright
light."

And on and on he trudged.

The orange sun was peeping its head above the horizon when the queer
little old man reached the edge of the forest.

What warmth the glorious sun gave! His rays gave warmth of heart as
well as warmth of body.

The old man sat down on a log, to rest his tired legs and to take a
bite to eat.

Then a voice within the queer little old man began to talk.

It said: "Perhaps, after all, you should not have left the quaint old
town. You were a coward to run away.

"Ever since young Mr. Spendthrift came there to live you have been
discontented. And when the people began to take his advice rather than
yours, you grew angry and left.

"Is that the way for an old man to do who always had plenty to eat and
to wear?"

But another voice with a fiery little temper was waiting to be heard.

"What!" it cried, "have you no principle? Are you a worm, to be
stepped upon?

"Waste is wrong, no matter what you waste. Thrift is right and forever
will be.

"Therefore, hie you to the heart of the forest as you have decided.
You will at least have peace of mind, and surely that is worth as much
as 'plenty to eat and to wear'!"




HIS FIRST DAY IN THE FOREST


At last Father Thrift was in the heart of the forest.

It was very peaceful there.

The wind rustled the leaves on the trees.

The birds flew among the branches and sang and talked and scolded.

Do birds ever scold?

Oh, my, yes! You should hear the mother birds, sometimes, when the
father birds waste their time about the house and the baby birds are
hungry!

But this morning nearly everything in the forest seemed happy.

The squirrels leaped from tree to tree.

Robin sang his merry "Cheer-up! chee, chee! Cheer-up! chee, chee!" And
he sang it again and again.

I think he tried to say: "Welcome, queer little old man! Welcome to
the forest!" (Besides, he _may_ have found some good fat worms to
eat.)

The dry leaves and small twigs crackled under the little old man's
feet as he walked along.

He could hear the soft, rippling sound of the water as it ran over the
stones in the brook.

He knew that in the shade of the bending willow trees little fishes
played in the water.

Blue sky was above him. Green grass was all around him. Flowers grew
at his feet.

Was not the forest a glorious place in which to be!

The queer little old man drew in a deep, deep breath.

The air was filled with the perfume of the pine trees.

"Tap, tap, tap!" Who is disturbing the peace of the forest? It sounds
like a carpenter with his hammer.

"Tap, tap, tap!" There it goes again.

The queer little old man looked around.

"Oh, there you are, you little redhead!" he said.

It was Woodpecker. Funny bird! How swiftly he climbs the trunk of the
tree!

"Tap, tap, tap!" he knocks with his bill. "Come out from under the
bark, you bugs!" he cries. "I want some dinner."

But the bugs do not always come. So Woodpecker bores a hole in the
decayed part of the tree and with his bill goes after them.

Does he get them? Yes, indeed; so quickly does he work that the poor
little bugs wouldn't have time to whistle for help even if they knew
how.

"Curious fellow, that!" said the queer little old man. "He is
industrious, too.

"He reminds me of the hop-toad that came to one of the gardens last
summer.

"The toad, too, used to catch and eat the bugs. By doing so he saved
many a plant from being destroyed.

"But what a homely old fellow he was! And how handsome the woodpecker
is!

"It is quite true that one does not grow to look like what he eats,
but rather like what he thinks.

"The hop-toad lives so close to the ground that he sees only the brown
earth. And if he thinks at all he thinks of _that_.

"But the woodpecker flies in the air and lives in the trees.

"He sees the blue sky and the pretty flowers and the silvery brook.
There is beauty all around him. And if you wish to know of what _he_
thinks, just see how he _looks_."

Thus the queer old man spent his first day in the forest. Every little
thing interested him. He watched the busy bees at work. He traced the
footprints of bears and rabbits and deer in the soft ground along the
brook.

But at last night came and spread its cover of darkness over all.

In a cave the queer little man made a soft bed of dry leaves. Then he
lay down to sleep.

"Friends, good-night," he whispered to the forest.

And the trees rustled back, "Good-night, good-night."




GREAT GRAY OWL


Great Gray Owl sat up in the tree, winking and blinking.

He would turn his head first in one direction, then in another.

Wise old bird! What he could not see with those large glassy eyes of
his was hardly worth seeing.

Suddenly he flew to the ground. There, like a brave sentinel, he
marched back and forth in front of the cave in which Father Thrift was
sleeping.

Several times in the night the queer little old man heard the hooting
of the owl. More than once he thought he heard the wise bird say,
"Who-oo, who-oo goes there?"

The first time a sharp "Hiss-ss, hiss-ss!" came in reply. Father
Thrift shivered to think of a snake crawling so near him.

Then he heard the owl's sharp command: "Halt! What is your business
here?"

"I'm visiting friends that live in a hole in that cave," replied the
snake.

"I advise you to do your visiting some other time," said the owl.
"Father Thrift is sleeping in the cave to-night. He must not be
disturbed."

With the snake the owl's word was law. He had known of several snakes
that had shortened their lives by not taking the wise bird's advice.

"Such strong claws, such a hooked bill, such sharp eyes, are not to be
trifled with," thought the snake, as he wriggled along toward home.
"But what is the forest coming to when one can't visit his friends?
Besides, who is Father Thrift, anyway?"

Just then Great Gray Owl called to the snake: "Come to the cave,
here, at ten o'clock in the morning and don't forget. Tell your
friends to come, too. There will be a meeting of all the animals of
the forest."

As he finished saying this the owl heard a loud crackling of twigs and
a rustling of leaves behind him. He turned around just in time to face
Shaggy Bear.

"What, ho, Friend Owl!" cried the bear. "What are you about this
evening? Are you looking for wee mice or for tender little bunnies?"

"No," said Great Gray Owl, "not to-night. I am keeping watch so that
Father Thrift may not be disturbed in his sleep."

"And who, pray, may Father Thrift be?" asked Shaggy Bear.

"To-morrow, at ten o'clock in the morning, if you will come back here,
you may learn who Father Thrift is. For the present I will say that
the cave in which you have been in the habit of sleeping will be
Father Thrift's home in the future."

"So, so!" growled Shaggy Bear. "So, _so_!" (He spoke this last rather
crossly.)

"Yes," said Great Gray Owl, "that, at least, has been decided."

Then he went on: "Aren't you glad it was _your_ cave that was chosen
for Father Thrift? Aren't you _glad_? Think of the honor it will be to
you to have him use it! Just _think_ of it!"

What a fine fellow the owl was, to be sure, to give other people's
things away so generously!

As for the bear, whether he thought of the honor or not, I cannot say.
He never was known to be much of a thinker.

Nevertheless the owl's tactful words soothed him, and he felt quite
satisfied to leave things as they were.

"I know of other caves and of hollows in trees where I can sleep,"
said Shaggy Bear. "When I'm full of honey I don't care!"

That the bear was full of honey seemed quite clear.

Indeed, if you might judge by outside appearances, he was over full.
The sticky stuff was running down his chin, and he kept wiping it off
with his big paw as he walked away in lazy bear fashion.

Before morning all the animals of the wood, and the birds and the
bees, knew that at ten o'clock there would be a meeting at the cave.

What it was about or who Father Thrift was, not one of them knew. That
is, no one knew except the owl; and he wouldn't say.




THE ANIMALS OF THE FOREST


The next morning the sun was up before Father Thrift. In fact, when he
awoke the sun had already taken the sparkling dewdrops away on a
journey back to the clouds.

The sky was bright. The birds were singing, the insects humming. And
the flowers were smiling and thanking the sun for the warmth and the
light.

Father Thrift rubbed his eyes and looked about him. Something was
wrong, very wrong!

The rooster wasn't crowing. The dog wasn't barking. The horses weren't
neighing. Those were familiar sounds to Father Thrift's ears. And he
missed them.

He drew a deep breath. The air was sweet with the odor of fir trees
and of pine.

"Ah," he said, "how could I have forgotten that only yesterday I left
the quaint old town!

"This, then, is my new home in the forest. It is a glorious home!"

Soon the queer little old man had his breakfast. He had freshly picked
berries and bread, and clear, cool water from a spring near by.

Then he sat down on a log, to think.

Suddenly he heard a great rustling of leaves and a flapping and
fluttering of wings.

Turning around, he found himself face to face with such a gathering of
animals and birds as he had never in his life seen.

And at his elbow stood--who do you suppose? Great Gray Owl, whom he
had heard hoot in the night.

Before Father Thrift had time to ask what the gathering was about,
Great Gray Owl rolled his big eyes and said: "Father Thrift, permit me
to introduce to you the animals of the forest."

"I am happy to meet you all," said Father Thrift kindly.

Then the animals gave a shout that sounded like three cheers and a
hundred tigers.

Do you wonder at that? You will not when I tell you all that were
present.

There were the shaggy bears, the red foxes, the busy beavers, the gray
wolves, the cottontail rabbits, the bushytail squirrels, the
woodchucks, the chipmunks, and the deer.

Then there were the eagles, the owls, the hawks, the crows, the blue
jays, and the robins, and many others of the bird family. Even the
honeybees and the butterflies, the insects and the snakes were there.

Indeed, all the animals of the forest must have been present, there
were so many.

It was wonderful how quickly they had learned of Father Thrift's
coming to their home.

Now the Great Gray Owl was waving a stick in the air, motioning for
silence.

When everything was quiet, he perched himself on a tall stump, where
every one could see him, and made a speech.

"Father Thrift," he said, "we welcome you to the forest. We are glad
that you have come to live with us.

"Many years ago we birds and animals had a king. But he died and since
then things have not gone well with us.

"We have not lived wisely. I fear many of us have wasted when we had
plenty, and suffered when what we had was gone.

"If you will be our king, we will promise to do exactly as you say."

He rolled his big eyes at the animals and asked, "Won't we?" And every
one of the animals shouted, "We will!"

But Father Thrift declared that he would rather be only one of them,
instead of being their ruler.

He would advise them, and teach them, and help them.

"And we will help you, too," said Shaggy Bear. "I'll give you my cave
for keeps, to begin with."

"And I'll bring you nuts to eat," said Bushytail Squirrel.

"And I'll bring you some of my honey," said Honeybee. "That is, I will
if Shaggy Bear doesn't steal it all."

"And I'll bring you plenty of mice," said Great Gray Owl.

But Father Thrift only smiled at that. For, of course, mice would be
of no use to him!




WHAT MADE THE BEAR SICK


Father Thrift was busy carrying pine needles into his cave. Pine
needles make a soft carpet. And the bare floor of the cave was _so_
hard.

At last he had enough and he sat down to rest.

Just then he looked out of his cave and saw Shaggy Bear, half walking,
half crawling toward him.

"Why, whatever is the matter?" Father Thrift exclaimed in
astonishment.

"I am so sick I believe I shall die," groaned the bear. The poor
fellow's face was pale and tears were running down his cheeks.

"Oh, cheer up, cheer up!" cried Father Thrift briskly. "Why should you
_want_ to die?"

"That's it--I don't!" returned the bear sorrowfully. "But I believe my
time has come."

"Where do you feel the worst--in your stomach?" asked Father Thrift.

"Yes," replied Shaggy Bear. "That is where the trouble started."

"I thought so; I thought so," said Father Thrift. "I wonder that you
were not sick before.

"Now, first of all, let me tell you that you are not going to die, not
yet. But should you keep on eating as you have eaten in the past few
weeks, you could never expect to be strong and healthy."

"Why?" asked the bear, brightening up suddenly.

But Father Thrift did not answer his question.

"I am going to suggest something for you to do, Shaggy," he said.

The bear looked puzzled but hopeful.

"You won't like it," Father Thrift continued. "No one ever did. But it
is the only way by which you can become well and strong again.

"The very first time I saw you I knew that you were not eating the
right kind of meals.

"Why, bears are known to have such good appetites that we often hear
boys say, 'I'm as hungry as a bear!'

"But you don't feel that way. That is because you eat too much honey
and not enough solid, nourishing food.

"This makes you sick. And while perhaps you wouldn't die from it, you
would grow to be cross and disagreeable. Then no one would like you.
Would that be any better?"

The bear scratched his head. "But what am I to do?" he asked.

"Stop eating sweets for three months," advised Father Thrift. "Don't
you see that you spoil your appetite for good roots and berries by
eating too much honey?

"What, do you suppose, would become of boys and girls who ate nothing
but cookies and candy, instead of milk and eggs, and meat and bread,
and vegetables and fruit?

"A little candy, when eaten after meals, seldom hurts anybody. When
you are better you may have a little honey again, too.

"Another thing. Besides eating and sleeping, what do you do?"

"Nothing," replied Shaggy Bear.

"Hereafter you must spend some time each day working or walking or
playing outdoors," said Father Thrift. "You need exercise.

"Don't be afraid to run. That will fill your lungs with pure, fresh
air and make your blood circulate more freely.

"Eat only three meals a day and be regular. Do not eat between meals.
Remember that the stomach works hard and needs rest as much as do your
feet.

"Eat slowly and chew your food well, and I promise that at the end of
three months you will feel better than you have ever felt in your
life."

The bear made a wry face at all this. For he liked honey about as much
as he disliked exercise.

"Mayn't I eat _some_ honey?" he asked pleadingly.

Father Thrift looked at him a little sternly.

"None for three months," he said.

Shaggy Bear was in earnest and at once promised to do as he was told.

Then, as the bear rose to go, Father Thrift patted him on the back.

"You mustn't let this spoil your good times," he said. "Only remember
that nobody can be happy without good health."

It was a hard trial for the bear.

Many, many times he was tempted to stuff himself with honey and then
roll up in his cave and go to sleep. But each time he turned sadly
away from temptation.

And at the end of three months he was as sound and healthy as a bear
could be. Then how grateful he was to Father Thrift for his good
advice!

And the queer little old man was happy to think that he had been able
to help Shaggy so much.




HOW THE WOODPECKERS HELPED


One morning, as Father Thrift was sitting in front of his cave sunning
himself, he heard some one crying.

It was a squeaky sort of cry.

Father Thrift could not imagine who it could be that was in trouble.

He looked around, but saw no one.

Then he listened. The sound came from behind a large tree near by. He
walked over to the spot. And there sat--who do you suppose?

Little Gray Squirrel, crying into his maple-leaf handkerchief as
though his very heart would break!

"What is the matter, Gray Squirrel?" asked Father Thrift.

"Oh, Father Thrift," sobbed Little Gray Squirrel, "let me tell you
what some bad boys did to me!

"I live in the big old oak tree near the edge of the forest. I have a
nest in the old tree's trunk. There I live with my baby squirrels.
There, too, I have gathered and stored nuts for food.

"And now some boys have stolen all my nuts!

"Soon the cold days of winter will come. Then what shall I do for food
for my babies and myself?"

And the poor little squirrel cried until he almost choked, and fresh
tears ran down his cheeks.

Father Thrift looked angry. He said: "This is very bad. I am sorry to
hear all this, good Gray Squirrel. While I cannot give you back the
nuts which the boys stole, I think I can send some one to help you
gather more.

"There are still some nuts on the ground, and we'll help you to find
them."

Little Gray Squirrel thanked Father Thrift for his kind words. Then he
dried his tears and started for home.

And the queer little old man sat watching the bushy tail as it whisked
down the crooked path and out of sight.

Then all of a sudden he heard a sharp "Tap-tap-tap!"

Without even looking up Father Thrift knew who it was. "A friend in
need," he said to himself.

Then he called to the woodpecker that was doing the knocking. "I wish
to talk with you," he said.

Woodpecker flew down, and Father Thrift told him all about Little Gray
Squirrel.

"Oh, we will help him gather a fresh store of nuts," said Mr.
Woodpecker. "Indeed, we will help!" And he flew away.

Within a very short time a whole flock of woodpeckers was flying
toward Little Gray Squirrel's home.

Soon Little Gray Squirrel's troubles were over, for the woodpeckers
filled his winter storeroom full of the choicest nuts. Now he was sure
of having plenty to eat all winter for himself and his family. And how
thankful he was!

But that is not all.

When the woodpeckers were through filling the squirrel's storeroom
with nuts, did they stop?

No, indeed! One woodpecker who was older than the others got up on the
topmost branch of the tree and said:

"Dear brothers, do you realize now how foolish we have been all our
lives?

"In the summer we feed on bugs and beetles and ants and seeds.

"Then in the winter, because we know no better, some of us go South.
Some of us go hungry, and some of us die, because we cannot find
enough to eat.

"Why cannot we, too, store up nuts and have food for the winter as the
squirrels do?"

"The very thing!" cried the other woodpeckers.

So they all began gathering acorns and beechnuts and storing them in
the bark of the trees.

Some of the nuts they would drop beneath the bark of the tree. And
some they would drive with their strong bills into cracks and holes
which they found here and there.

The trees which were old and worm-eaten were, of course, the easiest
into which to drive the nuts. Knotholes, too, were good places in
which to store food.

When the woodpeckers had many, many nuts stored away, one of them
said:

"Isn't it strange that we didn't think of this before! We need not go
South to find a new home this winter. We can stay right here and still
have plenty to eat."

And that is what they did.

So, while the woodpeckers helped Little Gray Squirrel out of his
trouble, they helped themselves into the good habit of learning to
save. And they have not forgotten it to this day.




THE BUSY BEAVERS


One evening Father Thrift was sitting by the brook, looking into the
water. The bright silver moon made the night almost as light as day.
Everything was quiet, except for a faint ripple of the water.

Suddenly Father Thrift heard something go, "Splash-sh! splash-sh!
splash! splash!" almost beside him.

Then he heard a voice calling from the water.

"Father Thrift," it said, "you have never visited us. Won't you take
your canoe and come now?"

And Father Thrift, looking into the water, saw that it was Mr. Beaver
who was calling.

"Thank you, thank you, Mr. Beaver!" replied the queer little old man.
"I will accept your invitation with pleasure."

And soon the two were making their way through the water to the place
where the beavers were building their home.

And where do you suppose that was?

On a nice sunny hill? Or in the shade of the trees?

No, no! Instead, it was in the middle of a pond which the beavers
themselves had made by building a dam of mud and sticks.

The beavers' house was made of mud and sticks mixed with stones. Or,
rather, it was being made. The beavers were still working at it.

"My, my," said Father Thrift, "how very, very late you beavers work!
Don't you ever rest?

"I know you are very industrious. Nearly everybody knows that, as
there is a familiar saying among us that an industrious person works
like a beaver. But I never supposed that you worked all the time!"

"We don't," replied Mr. Beaver. "We work only at night. All of our
work is done then. And I am ashamed to tell you that there are some
beavers who do not wish to work at all."

"_So!_" exclaimed Father Thrift. "I am surprised at that. And do they
live here, too?"

"Oh, no," said Mr. Beaver. "We have no place for lazy beavers, or 'old
bachelors,' as we call them. Usually we cut their tails off and chase
them away."

"That is punishment enough," said Father Thrift. "Still, lazy folks
deserve no better. Wasting time is just as bad as wasting food, or
money, or anything else."

Then Father Thrift stopped to watch the interesting and wonderful ways
of the wise beavers.

Some of them dug mud out of the bottom of the creek.

Others cut sticks from bushes and trees with their big chisel-edged
teeth. By biting out chips, one by one, a beaver can easily cut down a
large tree.

The mud and sticks for their house and dam they carried against their
breasts as they swam, holding them there with their forefeet. Then
they would put the sticks in place and press the mud down.

Their tails they used only for swimming. But, then, those big, strong
tails make fine propellers.

"You are building a very large house, it seems to me," remarked Father
Thrift.

"Yes," replied Mr. Beaver. "But you must remember that several
families of beavers live in the different rooms of this house."

"Just so, just so," said the queer little old man. "I suppose that you
find your house comfortable. But isn't it rather damp?"

"In some parts, yes," admitted Mr. Beaver. "But in the center of our
house we have rooms above the water.

"Of course, as you know, we cannot climb trees like a squirrel.
Neither can we burrow like a cottontail rabbit. But in deep water we
are safe.

"We enter and leave our homes from beneath the water, unseen. And when
we are attacked by enemies we take to the water to save ourselves."

"I have been told that your food is chiefly the roots of the common
yellow water lily," said Father Thrift. "What do you do in the winter
when the pond is frozen and there are no lily roots to be had?"

"Oh," said Mr. Beaver, "we eat the bark of trees, too--mostly poplar,
birch, and willow. But, as the ice prevents us from getting to the
land in winter, we should not have even that to eat if we did not cut
a supply of sticks in the summer time.

"These we throw into the water opposite the doors of our houses and
leave them there for the winter, for bark is good beaver food."

Father Thrift nodded. But on his way home he could have been heard to
say: "Wise little animals! Always working. Always saving. Always
having."




THE GRAY FOXES AND THE RED FOXES


After Father Thrift came to the forest to live, one night each week
(except in bad or very cold weather) had been "story night."

On "story night" all the animals would meet in front of his cave to
hear and tell stories.

This night Gray Fox was to tell a story.

Gray Fox was a good story-teller, and so he always had a large
audience. Most of the animals were present to hear him.

And this is the story Gray Fox told:

       *       *       *       *       *

There was once a young fox who was very wasteful. He left half his
food on his plate. He spent all his pennies for candy. He broke his
playthings purposely, and tore his clothes needlessly. There was
really no end to his wastefulness.

This fox belonged to the family of Gray Foxes. And the Gray Foxes were
a prosperous nation.

They lived peaceably among themselves and with their neighbors, and
every one had plenty to eat, to wear, and to spend.

So no one paid much attention to Young Fox's wastefulness. Or if the
other foxes did pay attention to him, they rather imitated him, for he
_was_ a clever young fox.

Soon nearly all the young foxes grew wasteful. They all left half
their food on their plates. They all spent their pennies for candy.
They all broke their playthings purposely, and tore their clothes
needlessly. There was no end to their wastefulness.

And so things went from bad to worse.

But one day a messenger brought the Gray Foxes some bad news. The Red
Foxes were preparing to make war upon the Gray Foxes!

"Why make war upon us?" asked the Gray Foxes. "We are a peaceable
nation. We harm no one."

"True, true!" said Governor Gray Fox. "But remember, also, that we are
a prosperous nation. We are _too_ prosperous to please the Red Foxes.
We must prepare to defend ourselves."

And they did prepare. And then there was a long and bloody war between
the Gray Foxes and the Red Foxes.

The Gray Fox fathers and brothers, who should have been working in the
fields and mills and factories, were out killing the Red Fox fathers
and brothers.

And the Red Fox fathers and brothers, instead of working in their
fields and mills and factories, were out killing the Gray Fox fathers
and brothers.

But the foxes did not stop eating. And they did not stop wearing
clothes.

Just as many foxes as ever were eating food and wearing clothes. Yet
only about half as many were left at home to make the things to eat
and the clothes to wear. The rest of the foxes were away at war.

So, of course, there were only half as many things to eat and to wear
as there had been before. And because there were only half as many,
and every one wanted these, they cost twice as much.

Now it seemed as though the poor foxes wouldn't have money enough to
buy food and clothes. And they worried as to how they could get along.

But the rich foxes, like Young Fox and his friends, could still buy
all the things _they_ wanted, because they had plenty of money. They
bought more than they needed.

"This will never do!" declared Governor Gray Fox. "Everybody must eat,
and everybody must wear clothes.

"Hereafter every one will get an equal share of the food, and nothing
must be wasted. And clothes will cost just so much and no more."

The poor foxes said that that was fair enough, for they hadn't
anything to waste. But the rich foxes complained bitterly. They said
the Governor was trying to starve them.

Still, they had to do as the Governor said. And it was good for them
to do with less. It is true that the fat foxes lost their big
stomachs, but that made them look handsomer. It also made them feel
much better.

No one ever left anything on his plate now. No one spent his money
foolishly. No one broke his things purposely, or tore his clothes
needlessly. There was an end to all the wastefulness.

And when the war was over the Gray Foxes grew prosperous again. Only
this time there were no foxes as poor as there had been before the
war. Neither were there any quite so rich.

But every one had plenty. And because all shared fairly, they all
lived more happily.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Which shows," added Father Thrift, "that everything which happens is
for the best, and the world is a good place to live in, after all."




RED SQUIRREL AND BUNNY COTTONTAIL


The ground was covered deep with snow, and it was bitter cold in the
forest.

But Mr. Red Squirrel and his family were quite comfortable in their
cozy home.

Mr. Red Squirrel lived with his wife and three children in the hollow
of an old oak tree. They were a thrifty and industrious family.

They always had plenty to eat, besides something laid away for a rainy
day.

That is because Mr. Red Squirrel was very careful about little things,
and brought up his family to be the same.

Before the nuts were fully ripe, the squirrels would climb the trees,
gnaw the stems, and drop the nuts to the ground.

Then they would scamper down and gather them into neat piles. They
would eat some of the new nuts for breakfast, and put the rest away in
the granaries.

They worked hard all the summer and autumn, getting food for the
winter. And never a thing was wasted in Mr. Squirrel's house.

On this cold winter's night Mr. and Mrs. Squirrel and the three little
squirrels sat warm and snug in their home in the old oak tree.
Suddenly there came a tiny tap at the door.

It might have been the wind. Mrs. Squirrel was not sure. She listened.
The sound came again. Yes, some one certainly was knocking at their
door.

Who could it be, this bitter cold night?

Mr. Squirrel got up and opened the door. At first he saw no one.

"Who's there?" he called, in his pleasant, cheery voice.

"It is I, neighbor," answered a weak voice, sadly. "Please let me in!
I am cold and hungry!"

Mr. Squirrel opened the door wide, and said: "Yes, come in, come in.
It is a bitter cold night, to be sure. Come in and let me shut the
door. My tail is nearly frozen just from standing here."

Then there came hopping into the hollow of the tree trunk a rabbit.
Poor Bunny Cottontail, how miserable he did look!

His coat was all dirty and ragged. And his poor little tail hung down
behind instead of standing up straight and stiff, as a rabbit's tail
ought to do.

His ears drooped, and his whiskers were broken and limp. He had
rheumatism in one hind leg, and his eyes, which should have been as
bright as Mr. Squirrel's, were dull and dim.

Altogether he looked as shabby and sad as a bunny could look--not at
all like a respectable, well-brought-up rabbit.

Mr. Squirrel hastened to put poor Bunny into the warmest corner of the
hollow. And Mrs. Squirrel brought him some food, which he ate eagerly.

The little squirrels were so astonished at the rabbit's appearance
that they did not know what to make of him.

When Bunny was warm and rested, Mrs. Squirrel sent her little ones to
bed.

Then she and Mr. Squirrel began to try to find out what had happened
to make their poor neighbor so forlorn.

"How could I help it?" he cried mournfully. "I did not know that it
would be so cold, nor that the snow would be so deep that I should not
be able to get a bit of winter cabbage to eat.

"I am sure I am willing to work. I would take any trouble, but it is
not a bit of use. Indeed, Neighbor Squirrel, I do not see how you have
managed."

And he looked enviously around the neat, warm little nest.

"It was very simple," replied Mr. Squirrel, gravely. "We all helped
and put away part of everything we found. If we found six nuts, we put
away at least three in our storeroom. And nuts and acorns were very
plentiful this autumn.

"So, though the winter is very hard, we shall have plenty. We have
plenty for a friend, too. So eat as much as you will, neighbor, and
don't spare the loaf."

It was very kind of Mr. Squirrel, but he could not help the poor
rabbit much.

Bunny had been such an idle, wandering fellow that he could not be
content to stay with Mr. and Mrs. Squirrel quietly and help to do the
work of their little home. So in a few days he wandered away.

As he shivered in the cold and tried to find enough to eat, he often
wished that he had been as wise and as thrifty as the Squirrel family.

And the Squirrel family, being as kind-hearted as they were thrifty,
often thought of the poor rabbit with pity. They wondered how he was
getting on, but they never heard of him again.




SHAGGY BEAR'S MISTAKE


Father Thrift was carrying in wood for his fire. It had been a long
and hard winter.

Suddenly he heard footsteps in the snow behind him. He looked around.
And there--would you believe it!--stood his old friend, Shaggy Bear.

Shaggy was as thin as a shadow, and his teeth chattered with the cold.

"My, my, but you are out early this year!" exclaimed Father Thrift.
"Come in and warm yourself by the fire."

Shaggy needed no coaxing. He was so cold that even his voice had
frozen in his throat! At least he couldn't speak a word until he grew
warm.

And the way that bear snuggled up to Father Thrift's fire was comical
to see!

At last he managed to say: "Father Thrift, I shouldn't know this place
if I had not lived here so long. You have a door on the cave, and two
windows. And you have chairs and a table, and--and two beds.

"Why have you two beds, Father Thrift?"

"One is for company," answered the queer little old man.

"If you had just one more bed, I should say this was the House of the
Three Bears."

And Shaggy laughed at his little joke. (Or perhaps the good meal which
Father Thrift had prepared for him tickled his stomach.)

"Where have you been all winter?" asked Father Thrift.

"When the cold days came," said the bear, "I crawled into my cave in
the rocks and curled myself up into a big ball. There I meant to stay
until the warm days of spring.

"The snow made a door to my cave, and I intended to sleep all winter
long.

"Then the wind swept the snow away from my door and I awoke and looked
about. I thought that spring had come.

"And that is where I made my mistake. I should have gone to sleep
again. But I was hungry, having had nothing to eat all winter. So I
crawled out.

"The roots and the berries are still asleep under the snow. The fish
are under the ice. There is nothing for me to do but return to my cave
and go back to sleep."

"You must not do that," said Father Thrift. "That would be wasting
time. And time is the most precious thing we have."

"Is it?" the bear asked in surprise.

"Indeed it is!" replied Father Thrift. "We may lose wealth, but by
hard work and saving we may win it back.

"We may lose health, and with care and medicine restore it. But time
that is lost is gone forever."

The bear listened to Father Thrift's wise talk, but he shivered and
said: "Still, I am cold; and I can find no food to eat."

"I have a warm fire," said Father Thrift. "And I have food enough for
us both, and to spare. I will share with you if you will help me with
my work."

"That I will, gladly!" cried Shaggy, who was still smacking his lips
over the fine dinner he had eaten. "But how does it happen that you
have food, when the ground has been frozen so long?"

"When you learn to look ahead," replied Father Thrift, "you will find
that easy enough.

"In the warm days I prepare for the cold days which I know are coming.
I raise my crops. I gather berries and plums, and preserve them. The
apples and the nuts will keep as they are.

"So, you see, instead of letting go to waste what I cannot use when
food is plentiful, I save it for the days when food is scarce."

"Then do you rest all winter?" asked the bear.

"No!" said Father Thrift. "In the winter many things are waiting to be
done. Then I make my clothes, shoes, furniture, tools, and other
things."

"What are you making now?" questioned the bear, as Father Thrift
whittled pieces of wood with his knife.

"These will be wooden spouts," answered Father Thrift. "You like sweet
things--honey, for instance."

Father Thrift smiled. Do you know why?

"Well, maple sirup and maple sugar are about as sweet as honey. These
spouts will help us get all we want of both."

"Will they?" cried Shaggy eagerly. "How?"

"The maple trees, too," Father Thrift told him, "have been sleeping
all winter. Most of the sap has been down in their roots. In the early
spring it travels upward into the trunk and branches and the trees
awake.

"The maple tree does not need all its sap. It is willing to give some
of it to us. And when you have maple sirup you won't have to steal
honey from the bees."

This pleased Shaggy so much that he stood up on his hind legs and
danced a bear dance. How Father Thrift laughed!




THE SWEETEST THING IN THE FOREST


Father Thrift spent the next few days in making wooden pails, in which
to gather the maple sap.

What a lot of measuring and sawing and fitting and finishing it takes
to make a few pails!

Shaggy Bear helped as much as he could. But bears are _such_ clumsy
things!

Finally one day Father Thrift said to Shaggy: "Now everything is
ready. We have our spouts with which to draw the sap from the trees.
And we have the wooden pails and some earthen crocks I made from clay
last summer, in which to gather it.

"There is a large iron kettle we will use for boiling the sap down
into sirup and sugar.

"To-morrow we will tap our trees."

"Why to-morrow?" asked the bear. "That seems too long to wait. Why not
to-day?"

"Because," replied Father Thrift, "everything depends on time. There
isn't time enough left to-day. To-morrow we will start work real
early. And to get up early to-morrow we must get to bed early
to-night."

"I don't see how I shall be able to sleep at all," grumbled the bear.

But in a few moments he was fast asleep where he sat.

He was a funny fellow!

Still, Father Thrift did not mind. He liked the quiet. When it was
quiet he could think. In that he was quite different from many people,
who like only to talk.

And he thought to himself: "Suppose that each person wastes one hour a
day. A hundred days, a hundred hours. Multiply that by the number of
people in the world--"

But the figures were too large even for Father Thrift to count up.

"If every one would use that hour each day in reading a good book, or
in thinking, or in doing something else that is useful, how much
better the world would be in another hundred years!"

Father Thrift sat and thought for a whole hour.

Then he waked the bear and each went to his own bed to rest for the
night.

What a funny sight it was--a man and a bear sleeping side by side in
the same room!

Early the next morning Father Thrift and the bear went to the maple
grove to tap their trees.

Father Thrift bored holes in the tree trunks. Then he pounded a little
spout into each hole for the sap to run through.

As they had no handles on their pails and crocks, they could not hang
them on the spouts. Instead they set them down in the snow under the
spouts.

The sun was getting warm, and was drawing up the sap from the roots of
the tree into its branches. Soon you could hear it drip, drip,
dripping into the pails and the crocks.

Shaggy Bear was too astonished to talk. He put out his paw, and a
great drop of shining yellow maple sap fell on it. Then he licked his
paw. Then he grunted, a funny bear grunt of surprise and pleasure.

_Mmmmmm!_ It was good! It was sweet, truly. And what a delicious
flavor it had!

The bear put out his paw again and again. And how he did lick the sap
off it! My, oh, _my_! it was sweet! Not even the honey of the bee
tasted so good. It was like nothing else in the whole forest.

Meanwhile Father Thrift was arranging his kettle and pans and building
a fire.

"Now let us pour all the sap into one pail," he said, "and perhaps we
shall have enough to start boiling."

"Oh, but that may spoil it!" cried Shaggy Bear.

"The sap is made sweeter by boiling," said Father Thrift. But the bear
did not see how that could be.

When the sap began to boil, Father Thrift told Shaggy to stir it, so
that it would not burn.

Suddenly the bear began jumping about and crying: "Father Thrift, come
here, come here!"

Father Thrift ran over to see what had happened.

Shaggy was all excitement.

"Look!" he cried. "Look in the kettle! We had much there. Now we have
little. I told you the fire would spoil it!"

"No," replied Father Thrift, smilingly, "the fire has not spoiled
anything. When the sap boils, the water in it goes away in steam. And
the longer it boils, the more the water goes away.

"This time we will not let it boil so very long, and then we shall
have sirup. But the next kettle of sap we will boil longer and then we
shall have maple sugar."

When the sirup grew thick, Father Thrift said, "Taste!" And the bear
tasted.

"Oh, Father Thrift," he cried in delight, "it is the best thing I have
ever tasted! Truly, the boiling improves it."

Then when the maple sugar was done, Father Thrift called Shaggy.

"Taste _this_," he said.

Ah, how good it was! Nothing like it had ever gone into Shaggy Bear's
mouth before. Never had he tasted such sweetness.

And, oh, what a wonderful meal they had that night! Father Thrift made
golden corn cakes, and he and Shaggy ate the hot cakes with fresh
maple sirup poured over them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bear grew thoughtful after supper.

"Now I know why I used to get into so much trouble," he said. "I have
had too much idle time on my hands.

"After this I will work hard and learn. I--I think I could help you a
lot, Father Thrift. Will--you--let--me--stay--if--I--do?"

"I shall be glad to have you stay, always," said Father Thrift.

And the bear was so overjoyed at what Father Thrift said that he
cried.




ROBINS, CROWS, AND BLACKBIRDS


A soft little breeze was blowing. It was warm, and it had in it the
smell of green things growing--trees, and buds, and grass, and
flowers.

Little birds were singing. And they had joy and gladness in their
voices. And the colors of the rainbow were in their feathers.

Little brooks were flowing--flowing and growing into rivers. They
sparkled in the merry sunshine, and their laughter could be heard
everywhere they went.

The whole forest was glad. Why?

Because it was spring, merry spring. And spring is the gladdest,
happiest time of all the year.

Father Thrift was plowing his garden and Shaggy Bear was helping him.

And do you know how they worked together?

Father Thrift held the handles of the plow and Shaggy pulled it. He
was the horse. A funnier sight you have never seen!

The ground was hard, so that no seed could grow in it. Father Thrift
turned the earth over with his plow. This loosened the soil and made
it soft.

The robins followed the plow and found nice large angleworms for their
breakfast. Then they sang this song:

    Cheerily cheer-up! Cheerily cheer-up!
      Cheerily cheer, we're glad you're here,
    Little fat worms. Oh, cheerily cheer-up,
      Cheerily cheer, we're glad you're here!

But the little fat worms only turned and squirmed. They sang no song
at all.

The crows and the blackbirds followed Father Thrift, too. They ate the
grub worms and the beetles and other insects which they found.

Then, when the ground was ready, Father Thrift and Shaggy Bear planted
the seeds.

The robins did not follow them now.

But the crows and the blackbirds did. And do you know what they were
doing?

They were eating the seeds almost as fast as Father Thrift and Shaggy
dropped them into the ground.

Father Thrift stopped in his work.

"Crows and blackbirds," he said, "you must not do that."

"Why?" asked one old crow. "We always have done it."

"Yes, I know you have," replied Father Thrift. "And that is what has
given you such a bad name with the farmer.

"By eating the seed or pulling up sprouting corn you spoil the crop.
And so you have less food for yourselves in the end."

"How is that?" asked Cousin Blackbird.

"Well," explained Father Thrift, "every grain of corn you eat now
would make ears of corn if you let it stay in the ground to grow.

"And of every ear of corn grown some kernels are left in the field in
the shocking. So that for every kernel not eaten now you would have
many kernels in the autumn.

"Besides, if you will keep the bad bugs and worms and grasshoppers out
of my garden, I promise to give you every tenth ear of all the corn I
grow."

Then the crows got together. And all you could hear from them was a
loud "Caw, caw, caw!"

But they must have agreed that Father Thrift's proposal was a fair
one. The old crow spoke for all the crows. He said:

"We will do as you ask, Father Thrift. We wish all farmers were as
reasonable with us.

"We help the farmer, but we get no credit for it. We eat many, many
grasshoppers and beetles and worms and caterpillars and weevils every
year.

"These would be at work destroying the farmer's crops if we did not
eat them. And, for all that, the farmer is always chasing and killing
us."

"No," said Father Thrift, "the farmer does not dislike you for the
good you do. He dislikes you for the harm you do. Your bad habits make
you unpopular. Why don't you give them up?"

"Caw, caw, caw!" cried all the crows. I suppose they meant, "Yes, yes,
yes."

But whether or not they meant what they said I don't know.

As for the blackbirds, whatever was agreeable to the crows was
satisfactory to them. And they flew away singing, "Conk-err-ee!
Conk-err-ee!"

And as Father Thrift and Shaggy Bear sat down under a tree to rest,
Mr. Robin sang his song from the topmost bough. It was like this:

    Cheerily cheer-up! Cheerily cheer-up!
      Cheerily cheer, five of us here;
    Mother and me, and babies three. Cheer up,
      Cheerily cheer, we're happy here.

You see, Mr. Robin's English was not perfect, but he was too happy to
be careful.




THE LITTLE RAINDROPS


Every seventh day Father Thrift rested. To-day was Sunday, the seventh
day.

Father Thrift, as usual, arose just as the gray clouds were bidding
the earth good-by.

How that queer little old man did enjoy those summer mornings!

Not many people get up early enough to know what they are like.

It is then that the birds sing for Father Sun to awake. And the chorus
of thanksgiving which arises from the woods and the fields is enough
to gladden any one's heart.

Every boy and girl should learn to know these beautiful morning hours.

But this morning the dark clouds lingered longer than usual. That was
because they had brought the raindrops from their home in the sky to
visit the earth below.

The flowers lifted their grateful heads to greet the raindrops.

The thirsty roots under the ground were made glad by them. And so were
the leaves and the buds and all the growing green things above the
ground.

The frogs jumped about in their glee and croaked joyfully, "Oh, what
fun we have!"

The brook rushed rejoicing to the river, and the river ran to the sea.
And both sang on their way.

But the birds and the squirrels were not so happy when the raindrops
came tumbling down from the sky. They hid in their nests and under the
leaves of the trees and waited for them to go away.

Even Shaggy Bear did not like the rain. He hid in the cave, to keep
his fur dry.

Now the time was drawing near when most people were waking--that is,
in the cities. The farmer has learned to know the beautiful early
hours of the morning.

"Let us play," cried a tiny raindrop to the others. "Let us play and
stay here always. For the earth is a beautiful place."

But the older and wiser raindrops trickled away and hid almost
anywhere they could.

Some of them hid in Father Thrift's garden. Some of them jumped into
the brook.

They knew they were sent down to the earth to do some good, and not to
spend their time in playing. They had plenty of time in the sky for
play.

So if they wished to stay on the earth they must work.

The little raindrops that hid in Father Thrift's garden would help to
make the plants grow.

Those that jumped into the brook would help to give a good cool drink
to all who were thirsty.

Then Father Sun came out from behind the gray clouds.

"Come, little raindrops, down on earth," he said. "Those of you that
are not busy, or are not needed there, must come home. You have
important work to do elsewhere."

And, like the good father that he was, he gathered up all that he
could find and put them into pretty white and blue boats. And the wind
gently sailed them across the sky.

Then the Rain Fairies and the Sun Fairies joined hands until they made
a beautiful arch from earth to heaven.

We call this arch the rainbow. The gay colors are the pretty dresses
of the fairies.

Now the birds of the forest came forth from their nests. They
fluttered their little wings and sent the raindrops which had rested
on them down to the flowers and the grasses.

Then they flew into the tree tops, where Father Sun could see them.
And, as though to make up for lost time, they sang more sweetly than
they did on clear days.

How their songs gladdened the forest!

Father Thrift sat on a log to listen to that orchestra of a thousand
throats trilling from the tree tops.

And Shaggy Bear came out from the cave and sat down beside him.

"A pretty world it would be without the birds!" said Father Thrift.

"How dull it would be without their colors! The rainbow cannot match
them.

"How cheerless it would be without their song! Man cannot equal it."

And you may be sure that Father Thrift and Shaggy Bear did not forget
the birds in their prayers that night.




TROUBLE IN THE FOREST


The next day was Monday, the first of July. Father Thrift turned the
leaf of his homemade calendar. Then he and Shaggy Bear went out into
the garden to work.

All of a sudden they heard such a commotion! They looked up and saw a
great flock of birds flying toward them.

There were robins and bluebirds and kingbirds and bobolinks and brown
thrashers and catbirds and meadow larks and woodpeckers and wrens, and
all the other birds of the forest.

Did they come to sing for Father Thrift because it was the first of
July?

No, not one of the birds was singing now. They were chattering and
crying, but you could not make out what the fuss was all about.

To Father Thrift and Shaggy it sounded something like this:

    Charr, charr, caw, caw, churr, churr, chee, chee,
    Peenk, peenk, quit, quit, chuck, chuck, whee, whee,
    Tzip, tzip, thsee, thsee, conk-err-ee, whack,
    Jay, jay, mew, mew, whip, chip, crack, tchack,
                R-r-r-r-r-r-r!!

"R-r-r-r-r-r-r" meant, "We're angry. Next time we will fight them."

Now the woodpeckers drummed for quiet: "Rrr-runk, tunk, tunk!"

Then Mr. Robin walked up to Father Thrift. He said, "Oh, Father
Thrift, we have come to tell you that the boys have been very mean to
us. Let me tell you what they did to us.

"While Mrs. Robin and I were away they climbed up into the tree where
we had built our nest and stole our eggs." And there were tears in
his bright eyes.

Then Mr. Bluebird came. He was a pretty little fellow, and mannerly
too. "Oh, Father Thrift," he said, "let me tell you what the boys did
to me.

"My nest was in a hole in your apple tree. The boys tore the green
apples off the tree and threw them all about. They stuffed them into
the hole where my nest was and now I have no home.

"They are not afraid even of you."

Then Mr. Kingbird came up. He said: "What Cousin Bluebird has just
told you is true. One of the apples struck my nest and knocked it
down.

"There were four speckled eggs in it. I have lost not only my home but
my pretty eggs with it. Is that right, Father Thrift?"

And sadness and sorrow were in his voice.

Just then Brown Thrasher came along. He was hopping on one foot. "Oh,
Father Thrift," he said, "look what has happened to me! I was harming
no one. I was just singing a song, when I was hit in the leg."

"And pretty are the songs you can sing," said Father Thrift. "Many,
many times have I been made happy by your sweet and cheerful notes.
But who was it that hurt you?"

"The boys," replied Brown Thrasher. "They hit me with a stone from
their sling shot and broke my leg."

Now Mrs. Bobolink came up. "Oh, Father Thrift," she said, sobbing,
"hear me!

"While I put our house in order Mr. Bobolink would stand guard to see
that no enemies came near us.

"And he would sing to me at the same time. Such sweet songs as he
could sing! I think no other bird could equal him.

"We, too, had some eggs in our nest. And we were happy. Yesterday Mr.
Bobolink was perched on the tip of a bough, singing, when suddenly he
fell to the ground.

"I flew to see what the trouble was. And do you know what had
happened?

"He was dead. He had been hit on the head with a stone. Not far away I
saw the boys who killed him.

"To-day we dug a grave and buried him under his favorite tree." And
poor Mrs. Bobolink cried harder than ever.

Then Father and Mother Meadow Lark came up. "Oh, Father Thrift," they
cried, "listen to what has happened to us!

"We had four little children in a nest in the field. The nest was
covered over with grasses. We thought it perfectly safe.

"But while we were away getting food for our little ones, some one
stole them all."

And the Meadow Larks wept as though their hearts would break.

"It must have been the boys!" chorused all the birds.

Father Thrift looked very angry.

"All this is very sad," he said. "I am sorry indeed to hear it. But,
little friends, go home and make the best of things for the present.

"Shaggy Bear and I will find some way to help you."

Then the birds flew away. And they made such a noise that the clouds
trembled in the sky.




TWO BAD BOYS


For a while neither Father Thrift nor the bear spoke.

Then the queer little old man said:

"Those boys must be punished, Shaggy. They must be taught a lesson.
Killing birds is no joke.

"To-morrow morning take your lunch with you and go to the north edge
of the forest. There you will find a crooked road that is little
traveled.

"I believe that this is the road over which the boys came. They will
come again.

"Hide yourself behind a tree and watch for them. And when you catch
them bring them to me."

"Yes, yes," said Shaggy, "I certainly will."

So early the next morning Father Thrift packed the bear's lunch and
off Shaggy started for the north edge of the forest.

But he returned late that night, tired and cross, without the boys.

The same thing happened the next day, and the next.

Shaggy was so discouraged by this time that he thought it of no use to
try again.

But Father Thrift said: "Go just this once more. And if you do not
have better luck to-day you need not go again."

So Shaggy went for the fourth time.

And, as it happened, he did have better luck.

When he reached the edge of the forest he seated himself beside a
large tree near the road, to watch. But the kind breeze was blowing so
softly that he soon fell asleep.

And as he slept he dreamed a dream--a very strange sort of dream.

He dreamed he was the king of Honeybee Land. All of his subjects were
honeybees, and there were exactly one million of them.

In another month there would be half a million more of them.

If he had so much honey now, think how much more he would have when
the other half million honeybees started to gather it!

Now all that he had to do was to eat the honey as fast as the
honeybees made it.

That seemed easy enough. _Um-m_, how he loved that honey!

But soon he found out that bees are very busy and very thrifty little
things.

Oh, how very, _very_ busy they kept him trying to eat all the honey
they made!

Each day his stomach was getting larger and larger. How much farther
could it stretch?

Then, "Whizz!" he woke up with a start.

"I thought so! I thought so!" he said to himself, as he placed his
paws on his stomach and rolled up his eyes.

But, no, his stomach hadn't exploded at all. He could feel that.

Besides, there was an arrow lying right beside him. The arrow must
have hit him.

Just then he happened to remember where he was.

"The boys!" he said to himself. "The boys! In mischief, with a bow and
arrows."

He looked around. And there they were, sitting under a tree not a
hundred feet away from him!

He could see a bow and arrows on the ground beside them. But what were
they doing?

They were holding something in their hands. First they would look at
it, then they would blow on it. Then they would look again and blow
again.

The bear crept closer. Everything was clear to him now! The boys had
killed a bird and they were trying to find the spot where the arrow
had struck it.

So interested were they in this that they did not notice the bear
stealing up behind them.

When he got right over them he gave a dreadful growl: "Gr-r-r-r!"

It was very loud and very fierce.

"Why did you kill that bird?" he asked. "I have a good mind to eat you
alive." And he gave another fierce growl.

The boys acted like frightened rabbits. They were too astonished to
speak.

The bear picked up the bow and arrows.

"One, attention!" he commanded. "Two, get ready! Three, go!"

The boys took to the path which led toward their homes. But the bear
called them back.

"You don't understand," he said. "Now, go the other way. To-night you
must report to Father Thrift. Gr-r-r-r! And not another word."

This last command must have been a bear joke, for the boys had not
uttered a word.

Then away they all started--the boys as Shaggy's prisoners--for the
cave in the forest.




THE BOYS AND THE BIRDS


The boys spent an uncomfortable night in Father Thrift's cave.

Half the time they could not sleep. And, worse still, the other half
they dreamed such dreadful dreams!

But the next morning, after they had had breakfast with Father Thrift
and Shaggy Bear, the boys felt much better.

Still, they had a feeling that something terrible was about to happen
to them. How they longed to go home!

Then the queer little old man seated himself on a log just outside the
door of the cave.

"Shaggy Bear," he said, "go, tell Jenny Wren to ask all the birds of
the forest to come here."

Soon all the birds had come. And, oh! what excitement there was when
they saw the boys!

"Shoot them with an arrow! Hit them with a stone! Kill them!" the
angry little creatures cried.

Father Thrift lifted his hand for order.

When things were quiet, and the birds had gathered around him, the
queer little old man stood up. In a soft and somewhat sad voice he
said to the birds:

"My friends, let us act calmly and justly. Let us consider well before
we decide on the punishment which these boys should receive if they
are found guilty."

"But," protested Mr. Robin, "they climbed into our tree and stole our
eggs."

"They ruined my home," cried Cousin Bluebird, "and they wasted your
apples in doing it!"

"Yes, and they knocked down my nest and broke all the eggs in it,"
added Mr. Kingbird.

"They broke my leg with a stone from a sling shot," piped Brown
Thrasher.

"And they killed my poor husband," cried Mrs. Bobolink.

"They stole our four little children," sobbed the Meadow Larks.

"And they shot a bird with an arrow yesterday," added Shaggy Bear.
"Here is the bird. Here, too, are the bow and the arrow." And he
handed them all to Father Thrift.

"Why, they've shot my cousin, Blackbird!" cried the Crow, who had been
quiet up to now. "I have a good mind to bite off their noses and
scratch out their eyes."

"R-r-r-r-r-r! Charr! charr! charr!" All the birds became very much
excited. They screamed and fluttered their wings, and their eyes shone
with anger.

The boys were badly frightened. But Father Thrift quickly restored
order.

He said: "Let us first hear what the boys have to say. We will ask
them a few questions."

He faced the boys. "Did you do what the birds say you did?" he asked.

The boys hung their heads in shame.

Then one of them answered, after a pause, "I guess so."

"_Why_ did you do it?" asked Father Thrift.

"Well," replied the other boy, "most of the birds are no good, anyway.
They just eat everything we plant."

"What of yours have they eaten?" asked Father Thrift.

"The robins have been stealing our cherries," said the boy, "until we
have hardly any left for ourselves.

"The bluebirds eat our berries and grapes.

"The kingbirds eat not only our fruit, but our honeybees as well.

"The brown thrashers eat our raspberries and currants, while whole
flocks of bobolinks get their food from our oat fields.

"The meadow larks eat our grain.

"And as for the blackbirds and crows, they are the worst thieves in
the world. They even pull up our sprouting grain.

"So why shouldn't we kill the birds? They are our enemies, and they
do nothing but harm.

"And, besides, we haven't killed more than a dozen of them. Who would
miss a dozen in a world so full of birds?"

By this time most of the birds were quivering with anger.

And they cried again: "Shoot them with an arrow! Hit them with a
stone! Kill them!

"Who would miss two in a world so full of boys?"

"Listen, my friends," said Father Thrift. "I agree with you that the
boys deserve to be treated in the same way that they have treated you.
They have been cruel.

"Still, let us not act in haste or anger. Let us think matters over
well. Perhaps we shall find that some wrong has been done on both
sides.

"Go, now, and return at two o'clock. We will decide then what it is
best to do."




INSECTS AND WORMS


Long before two o'clock that afternoon the birds returned to their
place in front of Father Thrift's cave.

Some of them sat on the ground, some on the low branches of the trees,
and others in the bushes.

Now and again Shaggy Bear came out to tell some bird that Father
Thrift wished to speak with him.

Evidently important things were going on within the cave. But what?

Oh, how the time dragged to those waiting birds! Would two o'clock
never come?

At last the cave door opened again, and Shaggy Bear came out with his
prisoners.

Shaggy was the sheriff, and his business was to take care that the
boys did not run away.

Hardly were they seated when Father Thrift came out of the cave.

In one hand he carried a roll of paper, and with the other he adjusted
the spectacles on his nose. He looked just like the judge he was
supposed to be.

As in a regular courtroom, every one straightened up and was all
attention when the judge came.

The queer little old man seated himself on the stump of a tree.

Before him stood a high bench or table, made of rough boards. On this
he spread out his paper.

Then, turning toward Shaggy Bear, he said, "The sheriff and the
prisoners will please step forward."

And as they stood before him, Father Thrift read to the boys the
court's decision.

"The one who sins against the birds," the decision ran, "sins against
man's best friends.

"If we destroyed the birds, we ourselves could not live. Within a few
years there would be so many insects and worms that crops could not be
raised and plants could not grow. The bugs and the caterpillars would
eat all the leaves off the trees, while the worms would destroy the
roots.

"The flies and other harmful insects would kill the cattle. And then
they would carry sickness and disease among us.

"Why, the grasshoppers would dance on our very tables, while the
crickets sat on the dishes and played tunes!

"The ants would use our kitchens for parade grounds, and the worms
would crawl under our feet, in our houses.

"Yet you said that the birds were your enemies, and that they do only
harm.

"You complained of the robins and the bluebirds; the kingbirds and the
brown thrashers; the bobolinks and the meadow larks; the crows and the
blackbirds.

"So I have taken pains to look into the habits of each of these.

"The robin, I find, works during the whole season to make it possible
for the farmer to raise his crops. He is a natural enemy of bugs and
worms.

"He gets no pay for this work and asks for none. And the only reason
he eats your cherries is because you have destroyed the wild fruit
trees and berry bushes that used to grow by the roadside. Plant them
there again and the robin, and all the other birds too, will spare
your fruit.

"The bluebird catches the bad bugs and grasshoppers and beetles and
spiders and caterpillars in your orchard. And he very rarely takes
even a bite of your berries or grapes.

"The kingbird is a fine flycatcher and he does much good. Sometimes he
does eat a honeybee, it is true, but it must be because he mistakes it
for a large fly.

"The brown thrasher makes his home in the swamps and groves. He does
eat some raspberries and currants, in addition to the harmful insects
he devours, but nearly all of these must be wild ones.

"The few oats the bobolinks eat you could never miss, because these
birds feed mostly on insects and the seeds of useless plants.

"The meadow lark saves thousands of dollars every year on the hay
crop. He builds his nest on the ground in the meadow and feeds himself
and his large family on the crickets and grasshoppers he finds there.

"The crow and the blackbird, I know, eat some of your corn. But they
will not touch the seed corn if you put coal tar on it.

"Both of these birds do a great deal of good, for which they get no
credit. In the spring they follow the plow in search of large grub
worms, of which they are very fond. They also eat grasshoppers, and
weevils, and caterpillars.

"All of which goes to prove that the more birds we have, the fewer
bugs there are, to bother us. And the fewer bugs there are, the more
food we have.

"Therefore, I find that you two boys are guilty of a great wrong. Not
only have you killed the farmer's most valuable friends, but you have
destroyed food as well.

"Your punishment will be one year in prison for every bird that you
have killed."

At this the boys almost dropped to the ground, they were so badly
frightened.

"Oh, Father Thrift," they cried, "please don't put us in prison! We
have learned a lesson, and we promise never to kill another bird if
you will only let us go."

"My friends, what do _you_ think?" asked Father Thrift, turning to the
birds.

The hearts of the birds softened at the sight of the boys' distress.
And they said, "Give them another chance, Father Thrift."

"But theirs is a serious offense," Father Thrift said gravely.

Then he turned toward the boys.

"I will release you on one condition," he said, "and that is that you
will henceforth be kind to all harmless living creatures, and protect
them from cruel usage.

"Also, that you will ask all the other boys, and their fathers as
well, to do the same.

"Build bird houses for your feathered friends and encourage them to
come to your villages and farms.

"In the end you will profit greatly by it."

"We promise to do that," the boys agreed eagerly.

"Now Shaggy Bear will help you to find your way out of the forest,"
said Father Thrift.

"Your bow and arrows I shall keep, for you will never want them again.

"And when you get home, tell your fathers and mothers, your
grandfathers and grandmothers, your brothers and sisters, and the rest
of my friends in the town, that Father Thrift sends them his best
regards."

Then the boys said good-by, and they wasted no time in going.




AFTER MANY DAYS


The whole town was searching for the two missing boys. No one could
imagine what had happened to them.

"We shall never see them again!" sobbed their mothers. But they did
see them.

That very day, when the little birds had gone to sleep in their nests,
and the crickets chirped by the roadside, while night and the stars
looked down upon the earth, the two tired and hungry boys appeared.

Their mothers and fathers were overjoyed at their safe return.

All the townspeople crowded about them.

But the people could hardly believe the strange story they told.

"Father Thrift! Father Thrift!" they cried. "Why, it cannot be!"

For this was none other than the quaint old town in which the queer
little old man had lived for so many years.

"Upon our word and honor!" said the boys earnestly. "See, we cross our
hearts."

And they did.

This seemed to satisfy most of the villagers that the boys were
telling the truth.

"Still, the forest is dense with trees and brush," said one old man,
shaking his head doubtfully. "And it is alive with wild and dangerous
animals.

"Not one of _us_ has ever dared to go beyond the edge of _that_
forest. How could Father Thrift live there?"

"Let us not doubt," said another old man. "We had better follow the
advice which has been sent us.

"Have we not suffered since Father Thrift left us because we would not
take his advice?

"We did not appreciate him when he was here. We have learned to
appreciate him since he went away."

So the wonderful story was told and retold for miles and miles around.
And Father Thrift's good advice was taken to heart.

And the birds came by hundreds to live in the neighborhood.

The crops grew better each year.

And the people felt happier.

Then they pondered the things which Father Thrift had taught them. And
they did again as they had done when he was with them.

They lived simply, spent wisely, and wasted nothing.

And the quaint old town and the country around it grew prosperous, as
in the days of old.

Then after many days the people said:

"We must enter the wood at all costs--even at the risk of our lives.

"We must find good Father Thrift and do him honor."

So they went down the crooked road that led to the forest and went in.
The two boys led the way.

They heard the birds singing in the trees.

They saw the squirrels leaping and running.

They heard the ripple of the silvery brook.

They breathed the perfume of the pine trees and the firs.

They traced the footprints of bears, and rabbits, and deer.

Every little thing interested them now.

They gazed at the tender blue sky above. Never before had it looked so
beautiful.

Never had the grass seemed so fresh and sweet and green.

Nor had the flowers ever seemed so richly colored and so sweetly
scented.

Truly, the forest was a glorious place!

And nowhere--nowhere did they find the dreadful animals which they had
lived to fear these many years.

But they found a cave, a very strange sort of cave. It had two windows
and a door.

Inside were two beds and two chairs, and a table and a fireplace.

On the wall hung a home-made calendar.

Just outside the door was a high bench or table, and back of it stood
a tree stump.

"This is the place where Father Thrift lived," said the boys. "How
well we remember it!" But Father Thrift was not there now. The place
was vacant.

"The queer little old man must have gone to live in the beautiful,
happy, sunny land of which he often talked," said one of the men. And
the others agreed with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Still stands the cave in the forest. People from miles and miles away
visit it.

The guide tells them the wonderful story of Father Thrift and his
animal friends. And it seems that with each retelling the story grows
more and still more wonderful.

And there is a bird that lives in the wood which on moonlight nights,
whether he sits on a branch, or hops on the ground, or flies about, is
always heard whistling, "Fa-ther Thrift! Fa-ther Thrift!"

Many people misunderstand and think that he is saying,
"Whip-poor-will! Whip-poor-will!"

But why any one should wish to whip any one else I do not know. For
the world is such a happy place.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL
FRIENDS***


******* This file should be named 43287.txt or 43287.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/3/2/8/43287



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hyld og Humle, by Sophie Breum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hyld og Humle
       Fortællinger

Author: Sophie Breum

Release Date: July 24, 2013 [EBook #43290]

Language: Danish


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYLD OG HUMLE ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)





Afskriverens bemærkninger: Åbenlyse trykfejl er rettet i denne
e-bog, men forfatterens stavning er for øvrigt bevaret.
_Understreg_ er brugt til at gengive s p a t i e r e t tekst.




SOPHIE BREUM

HYLD OG HUMLE

FORTÆLLINGER

KØBENHAVN
DET NORDISKE FORLAG
BOGFORLAGET: ERNST BOJESEN
1900


_Oplag: 1200 Ekspl._

KØBENHAVN. -- NIELSEN & LYDICHE.




INDHOLD.


                                  Side

MØDRE                                7

DØDEN OG BRÆNDEHUGGEREN             43

KAMMERJUNKEREN                      48

DEN DRISTIGE                        61

KAPTAJNENS DATTER                   74

TO SØSTRE                          121

REKREATION                         158

DEN HØJE MAND                      168

EN KÆRLIGHEDSHISTORIE              178




MØDRE.


Den unge Frue lod Romanen synke ned paa sit Skød og gabede træt.

Saa tog hun Refraichisseuren og duschede ud mod Halvmørket, der
begyndte, hvor Lyskredsen under Lampens store Skærm holdt op. Hun
lod tankeløs Blikket glide hen over den Smule Glans, der var over
Guldsnittet paa Bøgerne og Doktorens blanke Instrumenter henne i
Skabene.

Rejste sig derpaa og lukkede Fløjdørene ind til det lille
vaabendekorerede Forværelse, hvor Aviser og Aargange af »Puk« og
»Fliegende Blätter« laa ordnede paa Midterbordet. Portièren blev
trukken sammen, Folderne smukt ordnede; saa vendte hun sig og
stod og saa paa den hyggelige Stue med Familieportrætterne, nogle
Landskabsbilleder og de magelige bløde Møbler; deres mørke grønne
Farve behagede Øjet -- ligesom Værelsets øvrige Udstyr -- uden
særligt at fængsle det, talte om hyggeligt Velvære og en Smag,
der ikke stred og ikke havde Trang til at stride mod det, som var
almindelig anerkendt som god Smag i denne Provinsby, en af Landets
største.

Fruen gik langsomt og let hen over Gulvet og flyttede Lampen og sin
Bog hen paa et Bord, der var stillet ved den store Stol, som optog
Pladsen i Krogen ved den lune, grønne Ovn.

Hun satte sig mageligt til Rette og sad og saa lidt ud i Stuen.
Strakte saa Haanden ud, tog Cigaretetuiet paa det lille Bord og
tændte; et Øjeblik sad hun med Cigaretten i Haanden og røg lidt; saa
var heller ikke det morsomt længere, hun lagde den, tog igen fat paa
sin franske Roman og læste et Par Sider.

Holdt pludselig op med en Mine, som om noget havde berørt hende
ubehageligt -- -- igen dette: en overmægtig Sanselighed og en
pinefuld Lidenskabelighed, der krævede sit Offer for bagefter at lade
Livet ligge hen -- dobbelt øde, trist og indholdsløst. --

Nu havde hun tabt Lysten til at læse. -- Det ny Broderi? -- Hun
skulde være rigtig oplagt, naar hun begyndte paa det.

Der laa nogle Piecer og Beretninger, som hendes Mand havde bedt hende
interessere sig lidt for, han var saa optaget af de Sager i denne
Tid. Hun tog et af Hefterne og bladede lidt, -- lagde det igen, --
det var saa uskønt og kedsommeligt. --

Der lød sagte Trin over Tæppet inde i hendes Cabinet, og Stuepigen,
en høj, nydelig Pige, kom ind.

»Manse bliver ved at græde; han længes vist efter sit Bad og sin Mad.
Trine og jeg kan jo godt besørge det, hvis Fruen er træt.«

»Nej, nu kommer jeg, Heralda.«

Den unge Frue rejste sig hurtigt og gik med. --

Da Doktoren lidt senere kom hjem, kaldte hun, glad og optaget, paa
ham, og han skyndte sig ind i Soveværelset, gnidende Kulden af sine
Hænder. --

Heralda holdt en Lampe i Vejret, saa Musklerne paa hendes blottede,
kraftige Arm traadte frem; Kokkepigen, der nødigt vilde gaa glip af
den unge Herres Badescene, syslede med Barnetøjet, der var hængt til
Varme ved Kakkelovnen.

Fruen stod og holdt den lille Fyr nede i Karret. Det buttede, søde
Barnelegeme gav smaa Ryk af Glæde, og den bitte lille, tykke Haand
slog henrykt ned i det lunkne Vand.

Doktorens Øjne straalede; da han traadte ind, var han endnu lidt
ærgerlig efter en hidsig Debat om kommunale Sager med Borgmesteren,
-- -- nu gav han sig optaget til at pludre til sin dejlige Dreng,
indtil han fik ham ganske ellevild af Velvære.

       *       *       *       *       *

En Uge efter sad Fruen i Spisestuen med Fødderne paa en høj Skammel;
paa hendes Skød laa den lille Dreng, der havde været farlig syg i
flere Dage.

Medens hun mekanisk syslede med ham, trillede Taarerne ned ad hendes
Kinder og faldt paa hans Ansigt.

Han slog besværligt Øjnene op; de laa dybt inde i Hulningerne, og
deres Udtryk var lidende som hos et voksent Menneske; de blodløse
Læber bevægede han svagt, og han havde ikke Kræfter til at røre
Benene, da Moderen tog Tøjet af ham.

Doktoren stod og saa til sammen med en ældre Kollega ...

Denne undersøgte Barnet og sagde derpaa:

»De maa straks se at faa fat i en god Amme. Det er det eneste, der
kan redde ham.«

»En Amme!« gentog Fruen og saa hurtigt op.

»Jeg skal telegrafere til Stiftelsen, naar jeg gaar herfra. De gør
nok Dem den Tjeneste, de Herrer derinde ...«

Da Doktoren traadte ind i sit Værelse, efter at have fulgt Lægen
ud, stod hans Hustru og flyttede mekanisk med Fotografierne paa
Skrivebordet.

Hun brast i Graad, da han kom hen til hende.

Han tog ømt om hende.

»Græd ikke, kære kære ...«

Men saa gav hun efter for sin tilbagetrængte Trang til rigtig at
hulke. Al hendes Sorg og krænkede Moderfølelse gav sig voldsomt
Udslag.

Men han kyssede hende og spurgte med Ord, som han ikke plejede
at bruge, og med en Stemme, der var fuldere og varmere end hans
sædvanlige, om _han_ da var helt ude af hendes Tanker, om den
Lykke, som de to ejede, og som havde fyldt ham med uopslidelig
Modstandskraft mod al Lidelse, da intet betød for hende, -- naar
Sorgen kom.

Hun løftede Hovedet.

Det flammede op i ham ved at læse hendes Øjnes Svar.

Hun knugede sig med et dybt Suk ind til ham; saa gik hun stille ind
til sit syge Barn. --

       *       *       *       *       *

Den store, svære Amme tog fat paa den lille udmattede Dreng med
sikker Ro.

Medlidende lagde hun ham til Brystet og dryppede et Par Draaber ind
mellem de trætte, smaa Læber; selv det syntes at anstrænge ham, han
faldt straks igen hen i tung Søvn.

Men efterhaanden, som han kunde tage mere Næring til sig, blev han
raskere og raskere.

Sundheden drog atter til Huse med den fynske, djærve Maren. --

Fruen begyndte igen at ofre Tid og Opmærksomhed paa sin Frisures og
sit Toilettes pyntelige Detailler, og Visitterne blev modtagne, til
Dels gengældte. --

Snart blev det saadan, at det næsten var dagligdags, at Doktoren,
naar han kom hjem fra Praxis, maatte ind at klæde sig om for at gaa
til Middag.

Naar han næsten var færdig, plejede hans Hustru at komme ind, for hun
havde saa uendelig meget at fortælle om Manses mange Paafund.

Tænk, han havde taget Maren i Næsen, saa det gjorde _ondt_, ligefrem
ondt -- han havde saa mærkværdig mange Kræfter allerede; Maren havde
slaaet ham over Fingrene, men saa havde han drejet sig paa hendes
Skød; det saa ud, som han vilde slaa igen. »Han bliver vist rigtig
uartig,« sagde hun stolt og lykkelig.

Og saadan havde hun den ene Historie efter den anden at fortælle om
Manse. Han _var_ nu ikke saa langt tilbage som andre Børn i den Alder.

Doktoren var nær ved at mene det samme.

»Hvem der kunde blive hjemme hos jer!«

Men det gik jo ikke an. Man kunde jo ikke blive ved at isolere sig.

»Naar _Du_ endda tog med.«

Og saa begyndte de igen paa den Komedie, at han agerede gnaven og
jaloux paa Manse, -- indtil hun alvorligt kom med sit: -- ikke Tale
om, at hun allerede gik fra Barnet, der havde været lige ved at dø!

De kyssede Uhyggen bort og begyndte igen at spøge.

Han fuldendte sit Toilet med en forstilt Omhu, som gav hende
Anledning til smilende og smaadrillende at hentyde til visse
Lapserier fra Ungkarledagene.

Opdagede de saa, at han var ved at komme for sent, fór han i Kjolen,
medens hun rakte ham Uhr og Nøgleknippe. Og han gik til Døren.

»Skynd Dig dog nu,« sagde hun; men Tonen og Maaden var saadan, at
han maatte tilbage endnu engang.

Hun gik smilende og glad med ind i Spisestuen, tog selv Pelsen fra
Heralda for at faa ham af Sted saa hurtigt, som muligt.

Men han gemte hende ind i den og truede med at bortføre hende med
Magt.

»Den tykke, kurtiserende Hr. Postmester til Bords og Æren af at
converseres af Tante Rosalie ved Kaffen om Mines eller Lines
Madkærester. Kan Du modstaa?« lokkede han.

Heralda smilede diskret; men Maren, der stillede med Manse, som
skulde sige »adjøs til Fatter«, lo højt.

Herren og Fruen saa til hinanden, halvt muntert, halvt vemodigt; det
var, som der efter Spændingen var kommen en vis ubevidst Reaktion,
der fik dem til at være lystige, næsten legende i hinandens Selskab,
medens de dog havde saa let ved at føle Refleksen af Sygdomsdagenes
Angst og Sorg.

       *       *       *       *       *

Maren blev snart uundværlig.

Efterhaanden som Mindet om den Alvor, der brutalt og ukaldet havde
paatrængt sig de unge Folk, blegnede, kom den statelige, typiske
Maren ligefrem til at »tage sig ud« som saa meget andet Tilbehør i
det elegante Hjem.

Fruen fik travlt med at gaa til Syersker med Maren, der skulde have
store Forklæder, Hue med røde Hagebaand og andet, som hørte til, naar
hun skulde ligne en Bondekone i Nationaldragt.

Og desuden maatte Fruen tage sig Tid til at sidde i Ro ved sit
Sybord, for hun vilde selv tegne og brodere Manses Kørepels og hvide
Kjoler, -- og han _maatte_ have flere af forskellig Størrelse, for --
hvor han lagde sig ud! -- --

Doktoren havde intet imod paa sin Vandring i Byen at møde »Optoget«.

Maren saa formelig statelig ud i sin Uniform, og det var med bevidst
Værdighed, at hun skød den blanke, pudsede Vogn med den yndige Dreng
... Og .. hvor var hans Hustru dog smuk ... denne tilbageholdne,
rolige Mine; .. hendes beundrede Ungpigeskønhed var afløst af en
langt finere og mere tavs Ynde.

Saa kunde det hænde, at Manse fik Doktorens Stok at holde paa, og
at de fulgtes hjem alle fire ... Maren i passende Afstand foran med
Vognen og svingende og svajende med de vide Skørter.

Naar Heralda stod i Vinduet og saa dem komme, faldt hun i Tanker.

For hende blev det uvilkaarligt saadan, at Doktorens ridderlige
Ægtemandsvæsen kastede en vis Afglans over hendes Kæreste, den flotte
Skorstensfejersvend, og det blev efter sit Herskabs Forhold, at hun
dannede sig sit Ægteskabsideal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Heralda skulde nok vogte sig for at give de Tanker Luft overfor
Maren, skønt de to var blevne meget fortrolige, især efter at Fruen
i et Anfald af Sparsommelighed havde givet Kokkepigen Afsked og
engageret en Pige, der gik hver Aften tidligt for at bo i sit Hjem.

Herskabet var igen begyndt at tage ud sammen til Koncerter, Theater
og Middagsselskaber; Heralda og Maren var ofte ene hjemme.

De lod da Døren staa aaben ind til Marens Værelse, hvor Manse, mæt
og tilfreds, sov i sin Vugge, og saa gjorde de sig det hyggeligt i
Spisestuen.

Heralda dækkede op med The og Smørrebrød. »Theva'j!« udbrød Maren,
»det ka' je'tte taale aa loute. Det er te' aa forgi' Mæj'sker me'
... saa gaar je' da hellere te' Va'jposti. -- Nej e' lille Drove go'
Kaffe! ..«

Og saa lavede Heralda Kaffe til hende; hun gjorde det med god
Samvittighed, for Maren skulde jo fedes og føjes.

Til Gengæld var Maren underholdende ... Hun fortalte saadanne
Historier fra »Stiftelsen«, at Heralda blev ganske bleg derved.

Men Maren havde ogsaa de rørende paa Lager ... fra den Tid hun var
sytten Aar og blev Malkepige paa Herregaarden og vilde springe i
Voldgraven af Sorg over, at hun var kommen for Skade og havde været
»saa ma'esløs uheldig«.

»Det va'tte te' aa nære sig for det Rak,« raisonnerede hun mut.

Men farlig Grin havde de alligevel havt. »Gu' sikken Sjov med
Forvalteri' og Landvæsenseleverne, som var saa store paa det, men
ku' si'e saa maje grinagtig »Komplementer« aa den Slavs Slu'er, naar
de mødte en stakkels Pige alene. -- Og saa Frøkenen, som knap ga'
lukke sin Mund op te' én, naar hun kom ne' i Mejeriet aa sku ha' den
nymaalk'de Mælk -- ja, li'e -- fræss fra Fass, som ha' sa'e -- denne
her Elever fra Køvenhavn. Ja dov, dov, hvor var hun storsnu'et. Hun
var da bleven kulret, hvis hun ha'e vidst, at hendes Grevekæreste
gerne vilde spelle Kæreste me' vos, naar ha' ku' komme gedolt fra'et,
den Luskemikkel.« Og Maren skoggerlo. Hun nærede ingen Illusioner om
Mændene; dem kendte hun kun fra en Side, men den kendte hun ogsaa til
Gavns.

Heralda benyttede Pavsen til at gøre et Forsøg paa at faa sin
sædvanlige Tone indført; hun talte om, hvor mageløs Doktoren var mod
Fruen, og hvor den unge Candidat Hansen, der kom til Doktorens og
spillede Violin, var forelsket i Frøkenen fra Etatsraadens.

Men det interesserede ikke Maren videre.

»De ere li'e tovlie allesammen,« sagde hun afsluttende. -- »Din Jokum
..«

»Joakim Larsen!« afbrød Heralda.

»Hvorfor kommer ha' ikke aa besøjer Dig? Ha' gaar nok paa Lærkensjov,
si'en ha' ikke har været her.«

»Min Familie synes ikke om, at han besøger mig paa mit Værelse,«
svarede Heralda hovmodigt. Der var dog Forskel.

»Naa saa det gør de ikke«, sagde Maren, helt imponeret af den Tanke.

Men saa gled hun ind paa det Omraade, hvor hun var mest hjemme. Og
Heralda vænnede sig efterhaanden til hendes Historier. -- --

»Men naar der kommer Børn?« spurgte Heralda en Aften, uhyggelig
tilmode.

»Skidt, de bliver sgu nok forsørret!« Maren slog overlegent ud med
Haanden. Lidt efter vedblev hun:

»Je' har haut tre. Ja, s'mend. Nummer to ... hans Far ... ja, dov,
dov, sikken Malasje me' den Unge ... hans Far var et lille tovli',
højbenet Kræ, der var i Besøj hos Grevens og var helt mør over det,
at Comtessen vi'te se te' den Si'e ha' var, og det skønt de danjsed'
og regered' me' Baler og Kommers den Sommer. Saa ku' ha' ju'tte nære
sig ... ja, skidt var det, og fuld var ha' mest, ha' sa' nere hos
Forvalteri og bælled' sig, naar di an're ha' lagt sig om Autningen.
Og saa kom Barunen jo væsgo' ne til mit Kammer og ga' sig lisse
ønkelig ... Storsnu'et og spedalsk blev ha' jo, for je' lukked' jo
Krampen paa for ham. -- Men je' var jo smaat kørendes me' Penge, ...
saa gik det galt elejn.«

»Herregud Maren; men Barnet Du talte om?«

»Ja, hvor je' tvined' over den Unge, der var ju'tte mer Ky' paa
ham end som Tobak for en Skilling. Idiot var ha' jo osse da! Gu',
hvor ha' hørsed' me' mig, den ny Dovter, -- je' maatte klarere
hele Re'ligheden u' for ham om denne her lille skitte Barun, der
var svirende. Ja, det var da nu ledt. -- Ungen fik je' da paa
Anstalten, frit me' Betalning og det hele, men gratis Skældu' fik je'
i Tilgivt af Dovteri. Ja, _ha'_ var skrap! -- Min a'en Dreng, det
var en a'erledes Fæ'relandsforsvarer end den lille Barununge ... Ja,
Herregu' -- nu har je'tte set ham i tre O'er.«

»Maren, hvor kan De udholde det for Længsel!«

»Det ve' je'tte! -- Je ha'tte haut Stunder te' aa tænke paa det.
-- Men det var li'egodt farlig Plasér aa bisse ne' te' min Mor om
Autningen, for Ungen, ha' var li'e te ha' skrinked', naar ha' saa
mig. Og hva' brø' je' mig om no'en Slavs Bal i den Ti', og Ka'lene,
de grinte jo. Og je' lo' dem grinne. -- Men saa var'et jo, at Naaden,
hun var hellig, og je' var bleven Vaskoppige, og saa vilde hun ju'tte
ha' mig i Køkkenet, je' maatte sgu afste' te' Majdag. Saa fik je'
Plads i Byen, og -- -- je' ve' sgu'tte, je' ku' da'tte sitte og glo
i det Hummer ve' Køkkenet hver Auten u'en at lukke min Mund op, saa
je' ku' hverken gø eller gave te'sidst; -- tovlie Mandfolk er der jo,
hvor vi _saa_ kommer, -- ja, det er sgu'tte saadan, -- men je' fik
da'tte Drengen at se, før je' rejste te' Køvenhavn, for Kærresten
ha'e det me' Fornemmelser. Ja og Køvenhavn, Heralda ... der er det nu
da saa møj tovli alsammen.« --

»Kæresten der var da for Resten stoderet,« vedblev hun ... »Saa kom
je' jo paa Stiftelsen ... je' klaver itte, Behandlingen var riæl
nok; je' ha'e det dov be'er end som Vaskekonen, hun var givt og det
hele, men hun maatte sgu lægge sig i Pjalterne og Møjet; je' fik da
baa'e Renlighe' og Opvartning.«

»Var det ogsaa en Dreng, stakkels Maren?«

»Det var et Pi'ebarn ... Der kom no'ne fine Folk, je' maa sgu'tte
si'e, hvem de er, de var helt væk i hende, og de bestilte hende te
aa komme te' dem, naar jeg rejste; je' skrev under paa en hel Del.
Saa kom je' jo herover paa en Studs, her er jo go' Fortjeneste;
Ma'en klaver je'te paa, og Dovteren og Fruen er jo da osse maje pæne
Mæ'jsker.« --

Manse tillod sig at smaagrynte lidt.

»Saa nu ska' det Kræ te' aa tre'e mig igen,« udbrød Maren, »Du ka'
ta' og vende ham.«

Da Heralda atter havde sat sig til Rette, begyndte Maren Samtalen
igen.

»Du er for Resten en Sta'spige at se paa, Ralde. Sikke tynd Du er.«

»Naa--aa.« Heralda vred sig smigret.

»Ja, nu ka' Du jo bare vente, te' Du har vaaren me' tre Gange;«
tilføjede Maren eftertænksomt.

»Slæbe og sli'e, te' man ønsker det uskyldige Liv Fa'en i Vold,«,
blev hun ved uden at agte paa Heraldas Mine. »Første Gang slævede je'
Vand te' en Time, før je' la'e mig ... Saa gaar »Figuren« sgu ... Det
skal Du se, naar Du først er i'et.«

Heralda blev fnysende vred og hvast fornærmet.

»Ja« .. sagde Maren uforstyrrelig, »saadan var je' osse .. lynende i
Ho'et, straks de kom te' mig me' Vrøvl ... Men saa er de jo saa sø'e
og sleske de Bæster, og ve' ikke, hvor de ska' skave sig og snakke
om Kærlighe' og den Slavs ... Men bav etter, naar vi ska' ha' Penge
te' Ungen, ja ... saa er der en a'en Snak, -- ja der er ... Og vi ka'
da'tte drovne dem som Kattekil'jer.«

Saa ringede det.

Maren ryddede af Vejen, og Heralda tog mod Herskabet.

Fruen kom straks ind i Spisestuen. Hun var i stort Toilette, det
silkeforede Slag hang løst over hendes smukke Skuldre, og hun var ved
at trække Hanskerne af.

Der var noget sødt og skælmsk over hende; Rødme i Kinderne og et Skær
i Øjnene af vaagen Livfuldhed; nu brød en varmere og dybere Glans
frem i dem, idet hun sagde:

»Hvordan har min dejlige Dreng det, Maren?«

Med Forsøg paa byagtig Tonefald svarede Maren:

»Det sø'e lille Bæst, je' tror s'men ikke, det varer længe, inden
ha' begønner aa vil plotte paa aa si'e no'et; ha' plaskede saadan i
Ba'et, det er vout, je' ka' tomle ham.«

Og Fruen og Doktoren smilede venligt til den tro Maren, der holdt saa
meget af deres Dreng og var saa god ved ham.

Fruen betænkte sig lidt. Maren syntes jo ikke om, at Manse blev
forstyrret, -- men -- hun _maatte_ liste sig ind og se ham endnu
engang, -- der var saa længe til i Morgen tidlig.

Søde, halvaabne Barnemund, runde, bløde Kind med Øjenvippernes mørke
Frynser, det lille Legemes sunde Varme -- hun kunde ikke lade være at
lægge sig ned ved Vuggen og kysse sit Barn og se paa det.

Manse begyndte at røre sig og gav sig lidt efter til at smaagræde.
Maren kom fornærmet ind. Ganske jaloux og ulykkelig saa Fruen paa,
hvor stille han straks blev, da Maren tog ham op.

Maren var imidlertid i naadigt Lune og holdt Drengen hen til Fruen
til Godnatkys. Forsigtigt kyssede hun hans Kind og de smaa buttede
Hænder og Fødder; saa gik hun beroliget ud.

Da hun var alene med sin Mand, sagde hun med Overbevisning:

»Du ... Maren er saa flink og fornuftig, -- Du kan tro, hun har lidt
meget under sit Fejltrin.«

Doktoren svarede ikke.

       *       *       *       *       *

Et Aarstid senere sad Doktoren og Fruen i hendes Cabinet.

De havde siddet længe stille i Tusmørket uden at tale.

Da lød det lille Klap, som sagde, at Lygten derude paa Vejen blev
tændt, og det usikre, dæmpede Lys faldt ind over Fruens Ansigt.

Hun sad med Hænderne hvilende i Skødet og saa' underlig blødt og
fraværende ind i Halvmørket.

Hendes Mand bøjede sig frem og tog hendes Haand. Det var, som hun kom
tilbage; hun smilede blidt og lagde sig ind til ham ...

Gennem de lukkede Døre hørte man inde fra den anden Stue en høj
Barnestemmes kejtede Pludren; den blev afbrudt af Marens fynske: »Du
ve' nok, hvor Skauet ska' staa, din lille Knæjtebasse.«

De to henne i Sofaen lo lidt.

Saa sagde Doktoren:

»Bliver det ikke godt for Manse, at han ikke altid skal være den
eneste.«

»Ellers blev der nok ingen Ende paa Forkælelsen, mener Du.«

»Ja, netop ..«

»Havde jeg nu blot havt Heralda. Hun gik saa stille og passede alting
og havde saa behageligt et Væsen ... Jeg vænner mig aldrig til Laura;
hun gør mig nervøs med sine klodsede Manerer og sin evige Spørgen ...
At Heralda, den nydelige Pige, ogsaa ... nej, det er og bliver mig en
Gaade og en ligefrem Sorg.«

»Det var værst for hende selv .... stakkels Pige.«

»Uf, den Kæreste ... Har Du set ham siden?«

»Jeg mødte ham forleden og talte med ham.«

»Spurgte Du om Barnet ...?«

»Jeg fik at vide, hvor det var i Pleje .... Han tog ellers Sagen
meget flot, skældte ud over Heraldas Fader, der er vred og ikke vil
se hende. Men han havde godt Arbejde, sagde han, og skulde nok vise
den Gamle noget andet, senere; .... men han var jo lovlig ung til at
gifte sig og binde sig.«

»Sagde han det?«

»Ja, med en vis Medlidenhed med sig selv. Jeg tillod mig da ogsaa at
sige, at det skulde han have betænkt noget før.«

»Stakkels Heralda!«

»Hun har en god Plads og holder meget af Barnet, som hun ammer.«

»Og hendes eget ..?«

»Ved Du hvad ... Du skulde tage ud at se til det en Dag, naar det
bliver godt Vejr.«

»Ud paa Landet!«

»Ti Minutter med Jernbanen ... Du har saa godt af at færdes lidt. Du
murer Dig saa meget inde herhjemme nu.«

»Ja ... men ... tager Du med?«

»Nej ... nu maa Du holde dit Løfte og ikke kun tænke paa din Svaghed.
Husk paa .. Barnet .. Det er jo ikke blot legemligt, at det bliver
til ... dets Sjæl, Temperament, Karakter ... Aah min egen ....« Og
han knugede hende pludselig stormende og lykkelig i sine Arme.

       *       *       *       *       *

Den unge Frue stod og saa fortabt ud over Markerne, hvor Toget, der
havde ført hende her til Landsbyen, brusede af Sted.

Nu var det borte. Kun en hvid, urolig Damp drev lavt hen over Jorden.

Hvis den nu formede sig, nærmede sig, omsnoede hende og kvalte hende
...

Hun knugede nervøst Hænderne sammen i Muffen. Alle de Fantasier, der
allerede var faret gennem hendes Hjærne i den korte Tid, siden hun
sagde Farvel til sin Mand! Hvorfor var han dog ikke ogsaa taget med!
..

Hun gik hen ad Vejen og spurgte sig frem til Bondehuset, hvor
Heraldas Dreng var i Pleje.

Først bankede hun høfligt paa Døren. Men da ingen svarede, løftede
hun med nogen Besvær Klinken, der satte tydelige Mærker paa hendes
Hansker, og traadte ind i et Slags stenlagt Bryggers.

Eller Køkken var det maaske. I det mindste stod der paa Sidebordet
et Lerfad med Flæskeben, og henne fra den aabne Skorsten lugtede der
stærkt af Grønkaal og brændte Kviste.

Fruen gik ind i Stuen.

Heller ikke her var nogen.

Hun saa sig nysgerrig og lidt beklemt om, hostede for at melde sin
Tilstedeværelse, men hørte intet andet Svar end det store Slaguhrs
langsomme tik tak.

Jo, nu skelnede hun et spædt Barns sagte Klynken henne fra Alkoven.

Hun gik hen imod den, flyttede en Stol, hvorpaa der stod et Vandfad
med Øllebrød, og kigede ind mellem de stribede Gardiner.

Der, paa de tykke Dyner med det grove, snavsede, krøllede Lagen, laa
Drengen.

Den, der havde givet ham af Øllebrøden, havde ikke baaret sig særligt
behændigt ad, for hans lille Ansigt var oversmurt med Maden, der var
tørret ind og sad i Klatter paa den fine, bløde Hud.

Hvor blev Manse dog anderledes omhyggeligt plejet og passet! Fruen
kom til at huske paa, at Svigermoder engang, før han blev født, havde
sendt hende noget fint duftende Sæbe, og i Brevet stod der: Du véd
ikke, hvor det er dejligt at lægge saadan et lille blødt, parfumeret
Barnehoved op til sin Kind ... Og nu denne stakkels, lille Dreng her!

Og stakkels Heralda!

Mon hun vidste, hvor uforsigtige de var med hendes Barn; han kunde jo
ligge der og græde, til han fik Krampe, uden at nogen hørte ham!

Medlidenheden bortjog fuldstændig hendes Uvilje mod Pigen. --

Der lød Træskoklapren udenfor.

Døren blev skubbet op, og en Kone traadte ind. Hun saa spørgende paa
den fremmede, fine Dame. --

»Naa .. det er Heraldes Frue. Ja, hun var jo ellers flink nok, si'er
de. Vi vilde jo heller ikke ta' mo' saadan enhver Rendetøs,« sagde
Konen værdigt. »Naa De ve' vel, hun kommer i Dau; -- ja, det gør hun
-- ja, om et lille Korn tænker je', hun er her. De ka' godt sitte ner
saa længe. -- Væ' s'go dov. Maaske De vil ha' en Taar Kaffe? Naa ja,
for je' ku' jo snart faa Kedlen paa. -- Ja, je' maa stræve, vi sku'
jo ha' Risbrændet rubbet a' Vejen inden Auten.«

Konen vendte Drengen og stak ham en Sukkersut i Munden; derpaa gik
hun igen til sit Arbejde.

Fruen sad lidt paa Træstolen henne ved Vinduet.

Saa blev hun urolig og gik op og ned ad Gulvet; hun mærkede,
hvorledes denne usædvanlige Situation voldte hende legemligt Ubehag.

Men saa tog hun sig sammen.

Det var dog altfor umuligt, hvis hun besvimede her og maaske blev
lagt ind paa den Seng.

Det var ogsaa Synd af ham at holde saa bestemt paa, at hun skulde
rejse alene.

Maaske det kun var denne indelukkede, tunge Luft her, der gjorde
hende syg.

Hun gik ud paa Vejen og gav sig til at spadsere frem og tilbage, fast
bestemt paa at vente her, i Stedet for, som Doktoren havde sagt,
at faa Lov at sidde i Kromandens Stadsstue og drikke Mælk og spise
Landbrød, indtil Toget gik. Hun vilde hilse paa Heralda og tale med
hende; det var dog i hendes Hus, at Pigen var kommen i Ulykke, og --
maaske havde hun noget at gøre godt igen; saa haard som mod Heralda
havde hun aldrig været mod nogen. Hun kunde ikke lade være at tænke
paa den Eftermiddag, da Pigen, bleg og grædende, betroede sig til
hende; paa hendes afbrudte og stammende Bekendelse havde hun kold og
rolig svaret:

»De maa jo saa hurtigst muligt ud af Huset.«

Hvor havde hun ogsaa kunnet tale saa haardt og overlegent; det tænkte
hun nu, medens hun gik frem og tilbage, mat og træt og med Graaden
i Halsen. -- Men langsomt, lidt efter lidt, beroligede den uvante
Stilhed hendes oprørte Nerver.

Hun blev staaende og saa ud over de udstrakte Pløjemarker, hvor Rimen
endnu laa mellem Knoldene, og hvor Kragerne hoppede om i tunge Sæt,
saa fløj de skrigende op, hen mod de store, lave Bøndergaarde, om
hvilke Poppelpilen stod med de tørre Kvistes spilede Grenenet mod den
svagt skyede, blege Vinterhimmel.

Hvor var her dog ... næsten morsomt stille. Hun lagde Mærke til,
hvor tydeligt hun kunde høre en ensom Vogns Rullen ude paa den faste
Hovedlandevej. Og hvor var det smukt med de mørke Straatages grønne
Mos, der saa' saa lyst ud i det dæmpede Solskin.

Men koldt var det alligevel at staa stille.

Den unge Frue begyndte igen at gaa frem og tilbage.

Men hun er ikke mere saa optaget af sig selv og sine egne Tanker; hun
er begyndt at se sig om.

Inde ved Vinduet i et af Smaahusene sidder en gammel Kone med et
stærkt rynket, meget udslidt, men mildt og stilfærdigt Ansigt.

Fruen kan ikke lade være at lægge Mærke til det. Konen hilser med et
Nik og viser sig lidt efter i Døren: »Værsgo' vil De ikke indenfor,
det er da saa koldt at gaa og vente.«

Fruen tager mod Indbydelsen og følger med den Gamle ind i den lille,
lave Stue med den brede Seng med Sirtses Sengetæppe og den høje
Kommode, hvor et Par hvide Porcellænshunde staa og glo stift paa hver
Side af Biblen og den store Salmebog. Den Gamle beder hende sætte sig
i Stolen ved Vinduet.

»Ja men, er det ikke Deres Plads?«

Den Gamle er næsten fornærmet. »Der ska' De re'nok sætte Dem; det er
den bedste Stol; den er saa go' i Sitningen.«

»Tror De, jeg kan se, naar der gaar nogen ind i det lille Hus her ved
Siden af?«

»Je' ska nok ha' Øje me' Vejen; det er vel Heralde, De ska' tale
me'?« ...

Og den Gamle underholder, dreven af et medfødt Gæstfrihedsinstinkt,
den fremmede Dame, og de komme snart i Passiar.

Fruen hægtede Pelsen op.

Den anden rejste sig med lidt Besvær for at hjælpe hende den af.

»Aa Herregu'! Naa ja; De er vel nylig bleven givt. Ja, je' ka' tænke
det.«

»Ikke saa ganske nylig,« svarer Fruen med et lille Smil.

»Saadan en ung, køn Kone! Ja, ja, Modernavnet er helligt,« siger den
Gamle, der endnu er i den Tankerække, som Synet af hendes Gæst vakte
i hende. »Modernavnet er helligt. Herregu', ja. Ellers sto' vi vel
heller ikke alt det igennem. De ka' tro, -- det er et stort Øjeblik,
naar vi lægger Barnet til Brystet. Aah, vi knuger det ind te' vos,
aah saa fast, saa fast ..«

Fruen havde pludselig faaet Glans i Øjnene og Rødme i Kinderne. Den
gamle, fattige Moders højtidelige Tonefald fik hendes Hjærte til at
banke af en dyb og hemmelig Lykke.

»Ja, der er jo no'e at staa igennem,« vedblev den Gamle. »Da Knu'
blev født, var det saa fattigt for vos; og vi ha'e ikke skikket Bu'
te' Bønderne. -- Saa plejede de ikke van at sende Basselma' dengang,«
tilføjede hun forklarende. »En bitte Flæsk og lidt Katøfler ha'e vi
da i Huset. Ja, og saa Øllebrø' i en Ørepotte; det fik je', og je'
spiste det altsammen. For je' var bleven sulten, ska' je' si'e Dem.
Og saa sa'e Rasmus: Nej, nu har je' sgu aldrig set Ma'e, har Du spist
alt det! Ja, og je' ku' ha' spist mer', om vi ha' haut det, sa'e je'.«

Den Gamle lo fornøjet, som om hun havde sagt noget morsomt. Og hun
gentog: »Og Rasmus sa'e: nej, nu har je' sgu aldrig set Ma'e, har Du
spist alt det! Ja saamænd.«

Fruen saa interesseret paa hendes milde, men hærgede Ansigt. Dette
var noget saa nyt for hende, der var saa forvænt og havde det
saa trygt og fredet og dog var blødagtig og ilde til Mode i sin
Ørkesløshed og sin stadige Spekuleren over sig selv.

Den Gamle blev snaksomt og fortroligt ved.

»De ka' tro, je' døjet me' min første. Ve' og faa ham te' Brystet.
Aah, je' maatte ha' et Tørkle' i Munden for ikke at skri'e. Og saa
var det jo, at min Mor kom ovre fra Taas'je for at se til mig. Og de'
va' jo yndigt for mig. Men saa sier hun: men jahne dog, skammer du
dig ikke din tovle Tøs, ve du se, du ka' faa ham til og ta' ve'. Tror
du, du ka' køve Mælk til ham hele Vinteren! Saa maatte je' jo staa
det igennem; ja, je maatte ... Men Jøsses je snakker, og nu piver
Toget. Saa kommer Heralde straks.«

Lidt efter saa de den høje, ranke Pige gaa hurtigt forbi Vinduerne.

Den Gamle rejste sig for at se efter hende.

»Ja, nu gik hun jo saa ind til Hjulmandens.«

»Maaske jeg maa vente et lille Øjeblik endnu her. Jeg vil ikke saa
gerne forstyrre lige straks.«

»Nej, det er vel heller ikke værd. Det er jo dog hendes Barn, den
stakkels Tøs ...«

Da Fruen skulde til at gaa, fulgte den Gamle hende helt ud gennem den
lille Forhave.

»De maa passe godt paa Stien, for den er lidt glat ... Ja, Farvel
lille Frue ... Gu' velsigne Dem. Og kommer De en a'en Gang, saa ka'
De godt sitte og vente her; der lugter jo ikke altid saa godt, hvor
der er smaa Børn og saadan ... Det er ikke saa redt, naar Manden
ta'er sig en Taar. Nej det er ikke ... og kivsomt er det for Konen.«

Fruen stod stille og nikkede, før hun gik ind ad Naboens Dør. Den
Gamle var bleven staaende med Hænderne under Forklædet og saa venligt
efter hende ...

Heralda, der sad med sin Dreng, saa' trodsigt op, da hendes forrige
Frue kom ind.

Men Trodsen blev til et stort, rørt Smil, da Fruen bøjede sig ned
over Drengen og sagde:

»Til Lykke med dit Barn, Heralda. Det er jo en sund og frisk lille
Gut.«

Lidt efter sad hun og saa interesseret og deltagende paa Pigen, der
vaskede og badede sit Barn under mange sørgmodige Udbrud over det
forsømte, lille Legeme.

»Aah Frue ... kan Fruen huske, at jeg havde Lov at benytte
Badeværelset hos Dem hver Lørdag ... Og nu skal det lille Skind være
i saadan et Griseri.«

Heraldas Taarer faldt paa Barnetøjet, som hun tog efterhaanden, som
Fruen lagde det til Rette for hende.

Heralda knugede Barnet ind til sig og saa knapt paa Fruen, naar denne
talte til hende.

Barnet drejede sit lille Hovede nærmere ind til hende.

Da brast hun i Graad.

»Herregud, min lille, elskede Henrik; er Du sulten? Kan Du huske, Du
fik din Mad hos mig den første Tid! -- Jamen, jeg maa jo ikke, jeg
tør jo ikke, min lille, kære, yndige Dreng; jeg tør jo ikke, saa er
der jo ikke noget til lille Kaj, naar jeg kommer hjem.«

Fruen vendte sig heftigt om og gav sig til at se ud af Vinduet for
at skjule sin Bevægelse. Hun kom til at tænke paa nogle Ord, som hun
havde hørt paa en Visit, hvor hun havde truffen Heraldas nuværende
Frue; en Dame havde sagt: »Det er rigtignok udmærket, De faar en
Amme, saa er De dog mindre bunden!« Og Kajs Moder havde svaret: »Ja,
ellers blev det for generende. For min Skyld kan vi godt begynde paa
Prøverne til Basarkomedien nu; jeg kan jo heldigvis være hjemme fra,
saa meget det skal være.«

Det var en underlig tom og flov Følelse at mindes dette, her, i denne
Stue.

Men i næste Nu svulmede al hendes Hjærtes Kærlighed, -- hvad var dog
al den tidopslugende Færden sammen med ligegyldige Selskabsmennesker
mod den ene, stærke, dejlige Følelse at have sit Barn -- nyt Liv,
rigt paa alle gode Muligheder, nyt Liv, som man elskede uforklarligt.

Den samme Kærlighedsfølelse havde Pigen, -- saa var hendes Hjærte
ikke fordærvet -- Pigen, som kun i korte Øjeblikke kunde gemme sit
Barn i sine Arme. --

Hvorfor, hvorfor er det ikke saadan, at hun og hendes Kæreste har
respekteret Samfundets Ordning af Kærlighedsforholdet, har bunden
sig til hinanden og først faaet Barnet, naar de tilhører hinanden
for altid, og aldrig nogen anden Mand eller Kvinde har Ret til at
ønske deres Kærlighed. Bo sammen, danne Hjem sammen, modnes sammen,
dele Hverdagslivets store og smaa Indtryk, til den rette, ukunstlede
Samfølelse vokser frem og binder dem for altid til hinanden, -- det
_er_ det skønneste, det bedste og den sandeste Frivillighed. --

Ovre fra Huggehuset klang Øxeslag, jævnt og ensformigt, som de havde
lydt i mange Timer; paa Vejen kørte en Mejerikusk forbi med sine
mange Spande; en Karl, der havde været ude at skove, kom gaaende hjem
over Markstien, og fra Bondegaarden henne ved Vejskellet steg Røgen
til Vejrs og meldte om flittigt Arbejde inden Døre. --

Medens den unge Frue stod her ved det lave Vindue i den fattige Stue
og lyttede til Barnets Klynken og dets Moders ømme, bedrøvede Stemme,
gled den moderne, civiliserede Skal af hende og tog al det tillærte
med sig, og hun var kun _Moderen_, der tænkte paa det Samfund, som
engang skulde præge, smudse eller støtte hendes Søn.

Hun anede, at der blev gjort Fortræd paa en eller anden Maade, mod
hende, mod den unge Moder der og mod _Barnet_. -- Alle Børn skylder
ikke en frisk og stærk Kærlighed deres Tilværelse. Og naar de blive
voksne, mødes de af noget, der ikke er, som det skal være, men som
Samfundet vedbliver at taale, noget falsk og ophidsende, der tvinger
en usund Attraa, som ikke er givet dem af Naturens kloge Haand, ind i
deres paavirkelige Sind .... At man vovede at friste paa saa mange
Maader, at man understøttede saa megen tom Forfængelighed, fandt sig
i saa megen opblæst, latterlig Egoisme, at Kvinderne tidt var saa
tomme, saa troløse og uforstaaende og ikke havde Finhed og Ømhed
nok til at forædle de Længsler, de vakte, -- ikke kunde holde, hvad
deres Ydre lovede! -- Hvorfor banedes ikke Vejen for de Unge, hvorfor
fik de ikke Lov til at se Sandheden i Øjnene, hvorfor taarnedes
Fristelser og opslidende Adspredelser for hver Dag mere og mere op om
Slægten, som om den ikke var nydelsessyg og hastig nok i Forvejen.
Hun forstod ikke ret alt dette, som vældede ind over hende, hun anede
kun dunkelt, at noget galt var der ... hun havde ikke før tænkt nok
over det, det som gjaldt _hendes eget Barns Sjæl_.

Hun havde været med til -- tankeløs og med æstetisk Ubehag -- at
vende sig bort fra den alvorlige, fraseløse Henpegen paa Tidens
Saar og Usselheder. Hun havde været med til leende at fortabe sig
i Kantetheder og Fejltagelser hos dem, som af Kærlighed til deres
Samtidige og af Had til det, som tilsmudsede dem og øgede deres
hæsblæsende Egoisme og idéløse Materialisme, ærligt og uselvisk dog
idetmindste _forsøgte_ Kampen. --

Hun var ikke saa vidende, ikke saa erfaren, havde altid været gemt og
fredet, først i sit Hjem og saa hos sin Mand. Men _Livet_ gemte og
fredede ikke; det gav koldt og nøgternt hvert Menneske _sit_ Ansvar
og sin lille Lod i det store Land at opdyrke. Og _der_ skulde det
for hende blive anderledes. Hun havde ikke været nok for sin Dreng;
og hvorledes var hun udrustet til at være en Tilflugt og en kærlig
Vejleder for ham, naar det begyndte at spørge og undres dybt i ham!

Hun var i Grunden ogsaa en daarlig Hustru; -- aah ja -- vist var de
lykkelige; men hvorlænge kunde han have nok i den sommerlige, lette,
legende Forelskelse, som var Charmen i deres Ægteskab nu. Han, som
var saa alvorlig, og som daglig levede i saa megen Alvor.

I Begyndelsen var der saa mange Ting, som han vilde tale med hende
om; hun havde naturligvis gjort sig Umage for at høre efter, men
han mærkede med en Lydhørhed saa sart som en Kvindes, at Resonansen
i hendes Sind ikke klang ægte. I Virkeligheden _havde_ hun jo ikke
Interesse nok. Efterhaanden holdt han op at tale om den Slags Emner.

Selv havde hun lukket sig ude fra en Del af hans Sjæl. Men den Dag
skulde komme, da han, uden at ane hvorfor, igen af sig selv delte sin
Fortrolighed med hende.

-- De smaa dagligdags Bemærkninger, -- hvor det gør lidt ondt ikke at
faa Svar i samme Toneart, og den store fuldtklingende Fortrolighed,
hvor man bevidst, med Højtid, løfter Fligen for sin Sjæl. -- Tankerne
vældede ind paa hende. -- --

Hun vendte sig omsider og saa' efter Moderen, der sad med sit Barn,
men hvert Øjeblik urolig trak sit Uhr frem. Den unge Frue besluttede
-- paavirket af denne Dags Oplevelser, der havde virket paa hendes
sunde Begrebers Oprindelighed, som den kraftige Regn virker paa de
tilstøvede Planter, -- at sætte alt ind paa at vinde den Styrke,
som hendes Sjæl behøvede, og at holde sig borte fra det, som
overophidsede hendes Nerver og tærede paa hendes Kræfter; hun vilde
opnaa selv at kunne amme det Barn, som hun nu bar til Verden; hun
vilde ikke skaffe det Næring paa et andet lille Væsens Bekostning!

Hun betoges af en underlig tillidsfuld Længsel efter i et nært
dagligt Forhold til Gud at vinde Haab og vinde Styrke til i Sandhed
at blive en Opdrager og en Tilflugt for sit Barn. -- --

Heralda græd meget, da hun snart efter maatte sige Farvel til sin
Dreng, og misundeligt saa hun efter Konen, der stod med ham paa
Armen. Smaagrædende fulgtes hun med Fruen de Par Skridt hen til
Stationsbygningen.

Fruen gik saa underlig hjælpeløs overfor hendes Sorg. Naturligvis
.... det maatte jo være ganske forfærdeligt at skulle have sit
lille Barn ude blandt Fremmede ... og .. Synd for Barnet var det
selvfølgelig ogsaa ... men det hele var jo fra den anden Side set
ogsaa saa forkert ... og man maatte jo ikke glemme, at det var en
stor, stor Synd baade mod Gud og mod Samfundet at sætte et Barn
i Verden, naar Forældrene ikke var gifte og for altid bundne til
hinanden. Stor Synd, naar der ingen Rede var til at gemme det lille
Væsen i. Selv om den havde været nok saa fattig, -- det var dog det
eneste naturlige! ...

Men hun kunde ikke nænne at tale om Synd til denne unge, kønne,
bedrøvede Moder, der nu skulde bort fra sit Barn for at pleje og
passe et andet, hvis Forældre _betalte_ hendes moderlige Omsorg ...

Fruen satte sig ind i den 3dje Klasses Kupé til Pigen. De talte ikke
sammen, medens Toget fór af Sted.

Heralda sad og stirrede forgrædt og beklemt ud i Landskabet, som
Tusmørket slørede og gemte; kun engang -- da Fruen trøstende lagde
sin Haand paa hendes --, saa hun taknemmelig op. --

Da de igen stod i Byen, sagde Heralda:

»Her er nok ingen efter Fruen. Jeg kan vist godt naa at følge Fruen;
Fruen holder vel ikke af at gaa alene nu i Mørkningen; det er saa
glat paa Gaden.«

Saa gik de to bort sammen. --

»Sig mig nu ærligt Heralda. Hvor kunde det dog være --?«

»Jeg kan jo heller slet ikke forstaa det. -- Men man hørte jo saa
meget om alt det.«

»I mit Hus. Nej, Heralda, det har De rigtignok ingen Grund til at
sige!«

»Aah, Maren fyldte mig med væmmelig Snak, og det var altid, som det
var det eneste, at det _maatte_ komme dertil, for saadan gik det med
de fleste.«

»Sagde Maren det!«

Fruen blev tavs; hun tænkte paa, at hun i Eftermiddag havde sagt til
Maren, at hun tog rolig fra Manse, og at hun var saa glad ved, at de
kunde beholde hende til at hjælpe med at faa en flink og artig Gut ud
af ham.

Heralda fortsatte, hurtigt, som om det var hende om at gøre at faa
sig forklaret.

»Maren blev jo ved med at ville se min Kæreste, særlig efter at Trine
var rejst, og Joakim kom saa, naar Herren og Fruen var i Selskab. Men
Maren blev ved med alle sine Historier, og Joakim syntes, hun var saa
underholdende, og saa ... saa troede han vel, at han kunde byde mig
alt muligt, siden jeg ogsaa hørte paa al den Herregaardsraahed.«

»Men Heralda ... hvor kunde De ogsaa ... sammen med Deres Forlovede?«

»Jeg blev ogsaa vred, og jeg sad en hel Aften alene i Køkkenet, men
saa sagde han, at jeg var en Snerpe og en kedelig én, -- og han er jo
vant til fra Kjøbenhavn og Varieteerne, at alting skal være saa sjov;
og han er jo saa mageløs vittig selv.«

I det samme var der en fintklædt Herre af de forbidrivende
Promenerende, der halvt som i Vane strøg sig tæt op ad Heralda og
hviskede til hende.

»Der ser Fruen!« udbrød Heralda vredt. Og ganske fortvivlet og
haabløs udbrød hun:

»Det er da ogsaa, som Folk ikke tænker paa andet!«

»Heralda dog!«

»Ja, Fruen maa undskylde. Jeg mener det just ikke saadan. Men Fruen
kan tro, at vi simple Piger ser mere end saadanne som Fruen.«

De gik raskt af Sted, for Herren havde vendt sig og fulgte paa en
ubehagelig Maade tæt i Hælene paa dem.

Saa opdagede han, at han kendte Fruen. Han vendte sig og forsvandt.

Heralda begyndte igen:

»Joakim blev saa borte i lang Tid, jeg saa ham aldrig, og jeg vilde
jo nødig miste ham alligevel. Men saa den Dag, da Herren og Fruen var
til Deklarationsmiddag hos Etatsraadens, saa kom han. Og han havde
en Present med til Maren, men ingen til mig, og han var muggen og
tvær, naar jeg talte til ham, og han sagde, jeg elskede ham ikke. Og
det var en skrækkelig Aften, kan Fruen nok forstaa. Men saa Søndag
Eftermiddag kom han igen og gik lige ind paa mit Værelse til mig, og
han var ligesom i gamle Dage, og vi havde det saa godt og morsomt.
Jeg var saa forfærdelig glad, for jeg havde lige siddet og grædt, jeg
troede jo, det var helt forbi mellem os. Maren blev inde hos Manse
og blev der hele Aftenen. Og da han hørte, at Manse havde ondt for
Tænder, og at hun ikke kunde gaa fra ham, saa sagde han, at han ogsaa
helst altid bare vilde være ene sammen med mig, og saa meget andet
godt, sagde han, og han blev saa underlig ... og jeg ved ikke, hvad
der gik af mig ...«

Heralda bøjede Hovedet, men skottede halv trodsig, halv skamfuld hen
til Fruen ...

Men _hun_ hørte næppe efter mere; hun var dødtræt; Modløsheden var
paa engang kommen over hende; hun længtes usigeligt efter sin Mand
og sin hyggelige Krog i hans Arbejdsværelse ... hun kunde ikke bære
mere alene, kunde ikke rumme alle disse skarpe Modsætninger ... Aah,
hvile sig hjemme, rigtig hvile ud, medens han smaasnakkede muntert og
hyggeligt, bragte Ro i hendes Sind og fik hende til at glemme alle
triste Tanker ...

Mere koldt, end hun egentlig mente det, sagde hun Farvel til Heralda,
der skyndte sig hjem til det lune Barneværelse, hvor den fremmede
Dreng græd efter hende ...

Da Fruen kom ind, sad Maren og kyssede Manse, der sprællende hoppede
op og ned paa hendes Skød.

Trætheden svandt af Moderens Træk; hun gik hen og tog sin Dreng;
hendes Stemme dirrede lidt, da hun sagde:

»Jeg skal nok selv lægge ham i Seng i Aften.«

»Naa,« kom det fornærmet fra Maren, »saa ka' je' maaske gaa u'
me' min Kærreste, for je' er bleven forlouet me' Johansen hos
Matrialhandleri.«

       *       *       *       *       *

»Du ..«

Han vendte sig fra sit Arbejdsbord og nikkede glad til sin Hustru,
der saa frisk og munter ud.

»Ja, kære.«

»Jeg har gaaet saadan en lang og dejlig Tur i Dag igen. Og ved Du
hvad .. jeg .. jeg ..«

»Naa .. Du .. Du.« Doktoren gjorde spøgende Nar af hendes pludselige
Stammen.

Saa kom hun hen til ham, stod og støttede sig mod hans Stols Ryg.

Først da han lagde Hovedet helt tilbage og saa op i hendes Øjne,
bøjede hun sig ned til ham.

»Jeg er i en saa underlig, næsten overvældende lykkelig Stemning. --
Vejret var saa klart, -- jeg kan ikke glemme Heraldas Henrykkelse
over den gode Plejemoder, som Du har skaffet hendes Barn. -- Saa er
der Manse, som holder meget mere af mig, siden Maren er taget bort --
-- det hele, -- Du er jo ogsaa meget mere virkelig glad, end Du har
været --«

Hun rejste sig fra hans Knæ og sagde alvorligt:

»Du, maaske er det Synd af mig at være saa lykkelig -- saa mange ere
saa bedrøvede, og der er saa meget rent unaturlig forkert i Verden;
men Du ved ikke, hvor jeg er optaget af det Maal, jeg har sat mig.
Jeg _vil_ ikke give efter for min Svaghed. Vi _vil_ ikke mere have en
Fremmed ind til at være vort Barn nær. Vel?«

»Mange er jo nødt til det, og hvis --«

»Hvis, hvis. Nu ikke saa doktorklog, Du. Det er saa dejligt at haabe.
Jeg ved naturligvis nok, jeg er --«

»Forkælet, min egen Ven.«

»Hvem er det, der har forkælet mig allermest?« Hun lo til ham.

Saa drog noget større og alvorligere hen over dette blide, gratiøse.

Og hun løftede Hovedet og saa' stolt og ømt hen for sig:

»Har jeg faaet Lov at bære Barnet til Verden, maa jeg vel ogsaa kunde
opnaa selv at give det Næring, naar jeg ikke spreder og spilder mine
Kræfter.«




DØDEN OG BRÆNDEHUGGEREN.


Sneen falder og falder som i én Uendelighed. Den gemmer snart
Skovbundens gulvisne Straa; den ligger let paa Egepurlet, som endnu
bærer paa sit rødlige, sammenkrympede Løv, den hviler tungt og bredt,
i Flager paa de smaa Grantræer -- den falder roligt, som det aldrig
vilde høre op.

Brændehuggeren kløver Blok efter Blok, kvister de unge, fældede
Træer, hugger gennem de levende, saftfyldte Grene.

Hans Hue og Vams ere tunge af Sne; den siver fra Haaret ned mellem
Tørklædet og den runkne, røde Hals, ned paa Ryg og Skuldre; de vare
en Gang ranke og kraftige, nu ere de sammenfaldne og knoglede.

Store Fnug lægge sig paa hans Øjenlaag, han ser tungt op og blinker
træt til de smelte.

Sindigt og vanemæssigt lægger han Gren paa Gren til Dragten, som han
skal bære hjem til sin gamle Kone.

Han retter sig langsomt.

En Krage hopper hen over Sneen, og medens han slaar Hænderne i de
stivfrosne Vanter mod hinanden, ser han efter dens Spor, der bryder
Sneens ensformige Blødhed.

Saa giver han sig til at snøre Brændet sammen og slænger det op paa
Nakken.

Stien er næsten sneet til.

Han sukker og giver sig til at gaa, medens Snevandet siver ind i hans
Støvler, og Byrden tynger, saa det værker og smerter saa pinefuldt,
at han ikke kan tænke paa andet.

Med ét kaster han Dragten paa Jorden, lægger sig ned derover og
klynker Gang efter Gang:

»Gid jeg var død!«

»Gid jeg var død, saa elendig jeg er!«

Og medens han knuger Ansigtet mod sin Arm og sagte mumlende kalder
paa Døden, ser han utydeligt for sig vage Billeder fra Landsbykirken:
Herskabet i den vaabenprydede Stol, Mænds Nakker og Kvinders
Hovedsæt, udskaarne nøgne Engle, et rødt Skær fra Lysene op paa den
forgyldte Altertavle med Vrimlen af Figurer -- -- øverst oppe ved
Hvælvingen et strengt, koldt Øje.

Det Øje!

Han begynder at rejse sig, men hans tunge Støvler glide i den bløde
Sne, og han bliver liggende.

Ikke det Øje; nej, det vil han ikke tænke paa; han vil have i sit
Sind den Gud, der er Fattigmands Gud, og som bærer Lazarus ind til
Himlens Hvile og Varme.

»Gid jeg var død!«

Han vil ikke mere leve i den Elendighed, i det trælsomme Arbejde i
den lammende Kulde.

»Gid jeg var død!«

Sneen daler i store Flokke som i én Uendelighed. Brændehuggeren ser
sløvt og blændet ind i det. Pludselig slaar han sig for Panden, saa
Huen falder af, vil rejse sig, forvildet og knuget af Rædsel, men
bliver liggende paa Knæ med Hænderne foldede haardt mod Brystet.

Sneen kommer ikke mere som paa en lang, lang Rejse, falder ikke mere
med sagte Lyd paa de visne Blade, men staar stille og fylder Luften
med hvidt.

Den gamle Mand drejer Hovedet til den anden Side for at finde Frelse
fra denne forfærdelige Udslettelse af alt det Hverdagskendte.

Ogsaa der denne øde, blege Tavshed, denne fuldkomne Stilhed, hvor han
og hans Ønske og Kalden er det eneste.

Han vil berolige sig ved at tænke paa, at om en Stund kommer han hjem
... men hans Tanker flakke vildsomt og hjælpeløst, for han husker
ikke mere, hvorledes der ser ud i hans Stue.

Han raaber, men Tavsheden brydes ikke af noget Skrig; den staar lige
ventende med det store, alvorlige Spørgsmaal, for hvilket han ikke
kan døve sig med den vante Verdens smaa Hændelser.

Og dette har han selv kaldt paa i Trods mod Dødens og Livets Giver!

Han vil skrige, at han ikke har ment det, at han vil leve sit Liv,
saalænge Gud vil det; men saa bliver han med ét vild af Rædsel, og
Rædslen giver ham en stiv, kold, ustyrlig Kraft, og han farer frem og
hugger sin slidblanke Øxe ind i et levende Træ.

Men der er ingen Modstand og ingen Lyd.

Da synker han sammen med Hænderne for Øjnene og klynker saa usselt
som før:

»Aah, lad mig leve!«

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Det lyder saa let, det er Snefnug, der falde paa Egepurlets Blade.

Med et hæst Raab, der klinger højt i al denne Sne, folder
Brændehuggeren de stive Hænder i én strømmende, svulmende
Taknemmelighed; og mumlende og takkende, endnu stønnende af Rædsel,
slænger han sin Dragt paa Nakken og stavrer afsted, saa han puster
tungt derved.

Hvert Øjeblik er han ved at falde, men ilfærdigt søger han atter
Fodfæste og skynder sig videre ad den snevre Sti, medens Fnuggene
blænde hans Øjne og Byrden tynger den krogede Ryg.

Da han er ude af Skoven, følger han ikke Vejen, som krummer sig
henimod Landsbyen, men han løber tvers over de tilsneede Marker ...
hjem, hjem!

Kun naa sit Hus, sætte sig til Ro paa Bænken ved Bordet, medens
hans Kone taler og med haarde Hænder løfter Gryden af Ilden, saa
den klirrer, og det høje Ur i Hjørnet dikker roligt og taktfast, og
Viseren gaar hen over Staalskiven. ... Brændehuggeren var nær falden
i en lille Bæk, som styrtede raskt og muntert af Sted. Isen havde
ikke kunnet dække og tæmme den, hvor ihærdigt den end Nat efter Nat
havde skudt sine naalespidse Krystaller ud fra begge Bredder.

Den gamle Mand steg over den og gik videre henimod det svage, rødlige
Skær, som kom fra hans Hus; Konen havde taget Gardinet bort, for at
han kunde have det hjemlige Lysskær at styre efter. -- -- -- --

De to Gamle spiste af det dampende Fad i Tavshed.

Brændehuggeren lyttede med hemmelig Fryd til Skeernes jævne Musik,
naar de strøges mod Fadet, og han saa glad og beroliget paa Ilden,
der flammede og slikkede i munter Uro om Træknuderne.

Da de gamle Folk laa i den brede Alkoveseng, sagde Konen, hvem
Mandens gode, milde Stemning havde gjort lykkelig og højtidelig:

»Naar nu Vorherre løser op for os to gamle. -- Til al sin Salighed!«
føjede hun til med bævende Stemme.

Og Manden foldede sine Hænder i stille Andagt.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Sneen falder som i én Uendelighed. Og mod Nattefrosten fører den
lille Bæk sin Kamp; den risler og mumler, medens den styrter af Sted
langs de isklædte Bredder, hvor om en Tid de blide Forglemmigejer
skal staa og se til den kraftige Kløver.




KAMMERJUNKEREN.


Der var et byggelystent Konsortium, som havde faaet Kig paa gamle
Kammerjunker von Bangs Ejndom, Carolinelyst, i Udkanten af Byen.

Der var Grund!

Selve Bygningen var rummelig og gammel, over hundrede Aar, der
var ikke saa lidt Gaardsplads og flere Udbygninger, og mellem
Vejen og Boligen laa en stor Have, der hidtil havde skjult alle
Herlighederne. Paa den anden Side af den private Vej, der førte op
til Stuehuset, laa en lang Strimmel Køkkenhave; i et Hjørne bag
Udhusene var der en upaaagtet Trekant Jord, som slet ikke var til
at kimse ad, naar den blev ryddet for al den Hyld og de forvildede
Rosen- og Stikkelsbærbuske, som groede filtret mellem hverandre. --
Hvor nu Gitterporten og en Afviser med »privat Vej« fredede, kunde
der lægges Gade, Jorden kunde stykkes ud, femetages Bygninger med
mange Smaalejligheder rejses -- der var bygget flere Fabrikker i
Nærheden, -- Bang var over syv og firs, Formue var der nok ikke mere,
Frøkenen var paa Døtreskolen hele Formiddagen, den gifte Datter
var Præstekone paa Jyllands Hede, -- -- det arbejdede i Konsortiets
ledende Hjærne, den gamle Kammerjunker havde søvnløse Nætter, og
omsider meldte Byens to Aviser da, at Carolinelyst var af Ejeren,
Kammerjunker v. Bang, solgt til et Konsortium bestaaende af osv.

Kammerjunkeren skulde være ude af Lejligheden inden Flyttedag.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

En lys, solrig Morgen, lige i Begyndelsen af Oktober, stod Kirsten
i Carolinelysts store Køkken med en Kobbertemaskine i den ene Haand
og en Klud i den anden. Der var en fra Konsortiet inde hos hendes
Herskab i Forretninger, og det var Aarsag til, at hun var falden i
dybe Tanker, saa dybe, at en Kasserolle, der stod paa Skorstenen med
den rødstribede, smalle Sirtseskappe om, fik Lov at koge over.

»Jøsses! --« Kirsten fór til.

»Ja, vi ska' te arbe' me' et og tænke paa et a'et.«

En Dør gik ude i Entreen. Kirsten var straks til Stede og gjorde en
kølig Honnør for Konsortiets Repræsentant, en yngre, adræt Sagfører
med Cyclehue, halvrøget Cigar i Munden og Benklæderne spændt ind om
Anklerne.

Den gamle Herre fulgte ham helt ud paa Stentrappen, der med Opgang
fra begge Sider laa midt for Indgangsdøren; han bukkede høfligt,
Sagføreren lettede skødesløst paa Kasketten og sprang saa ned til
sin Cycle, som han ilsomt trak hen over de toppede Brosten til den
lukkede store Port.

»Spring ned, lille, og luk Porten op!« sagde Kammerjunkeren til
Kirsten.

»Der sku' vær' en Stads me' det Læs Tørv!« mumlede Kirsten; inden
hun havde naaet at parere Ordre, havde Sagføreren faaet Laagen i
Porten op, -- han skubbede Cyclen ud foran sig -- Kammerjunkeren saa
vedblivende høflig-oprømt ud, og Kirsten tænkte stolt og henrevet:
»Se til Knaabi[1], Ho'et op og ingen skæve Ben lige til det sidste!«

 [1] Knoppen.

Porten faldt haardt i, og saa var de to igen alene.

Kammerjunkeren gik ind i Entreen og tog sin Hat, Kirsten hjalp ham
Frakken paa.

»Frokosten er straks sæveret!«

»Tak Kirsten, jeg ska'nte ha.«

»Je' ku' ta' og lave Kammerjaankeri en Bi' Frekkedellehistaarie.«

»Tak, lille go'e, jeg ska'nte ha.«

»Det ka' Kammerjaankeri da tøgge me' en Solbærrom te'.«

»Jeg ska'nte ha', min rare Pige, tak. -- Jeg bliver her ved Huset?«

Kirsten stod og saa efter Kammerjunkeren, da han gik ned ad
Stentrappen, støttet til Jernrækværket med Aarstal 1805 og Navnetræk
H. F. S. og L. F. S. indrammet af Cirkler mellem de tynde, glatte
Stænger.

»Der er ikke maj rasia[2] mere i ham, det gamle Skind!«

 [2] Courage.

Saa gik Kirsten til sit Arbejde, og Kammerjunkeren vandrede rundt paa
Ejndommen.

Han var høj, tynd og rank; men af den gamle Kyrasserofficers
Spænstighed var der intet tilbage. De smaa Fødder i skinnende blanke,
lappede Sko syntes ligesom at søge Fodfæste, før de hvilede mod
Jorden; de smalle, rødlige Hænder støttede fast om Stokken. Frakken
var knappet lige op til det sorte Halstørklæde, som var vunden flere
Gange om Halsen og kun lod en smal Linje hvid Flip til Syne for
oven. Ansigtet var magert, velformet og rødligt. Det hvide Haar var
redt frem i Tindingerne, og Moustachen hang i en Bue ned om hans
Gammelmandsmund. --

Nu gik han sin sædvanlige Formiddagsrunde paa Ejndommen med den
overflødige Plads og de mange hyggelige Smaakroge; -- om en Maaned
var de ikke længere hans.

Den stille Gaard med de ujævne Brosten var omgiven af rødkalkede
Bindingsværksudhuse, hvor Vildvinen groede op over de røde
Teglstenstage. Ved Muren ind til Haven voksede et stort Kastanietræ;
mange brune, tørre Blade laa paa Jorden og rørte sig raslende, naar
et af de svage Vindpust naaede dem.

Der var en Mellemport, der stod aaben i Bygningen overfor Stuehuset;
den førte ind til en anden lille Gaard, hvor Stalden havde været.
Men det var mange Aar siden, at Kammerjunkerens Vogn havde rumlet
igennem den; den sidste halve Snes Aar havde han og Datteren levet
yderligt nøjsomt. Han opgav at ride og at holde Kusk, da han blev
nødt til at begynde at tage op af sin lille Kapital.

Nu var den næsten opbrugt, -- den gamle Herre havde ikke beregnet, at
han skulde blive saa gammel, derfor havde han solgt, -- og saa for
Børnenes Skyld, at de ikke skulde have det Bryderi, naar han var død.
--

Kammerjunkeren kom igen op ad Stentrappen.

Kirsten lyttede ude i Køkkenet: -- mon han vilde have Frakken af nu!
Nej, nu gik han ind i Stuen -- saa vilde han den Vej ud i Haven. --
Kammerjunkeren blev staaende og tog sig over Øjnene -- de hvidskurede
Gulve skinnede stærkt. Solen kom saa uhindret ind gennem de høje,
smaarudede Vinduer og blinkede som Glanslys paa buede Flader paa de
mørke, blanke Mahognimøbler med de mange fine, gule Indlægninger fra
hans Forældres Tid.

Mon Marie Frederikkes smaa Stiklinger henne ved Vindueskarmen taalte
al den Sol!

Det var vist bedst, han bad Kirsten rulle ned; -- han glemte det
straks igen; -- siden han havde anstrengt sig med at se Papirerne
saa nøjagtigt igennem, før han satte sit Navn under, løb Tankerne
underligt fra ham.

Han lukkede Havedøren i Gavlen op og traadte ud paa den store
Terrasse, der var saa bred som hele Huset, og hvor et Bord med Bænke
kun indtog en Krog.

Kammerjunkeren stod og saa udover Haven; Tujaer og Cypresser,
oprindelig sat som smaa Buske i Bede, ragede nu i Vejret som mørke
Pyramider om knudrede Stammer. En tavs, vims Fugl hoppede om i
Gangen, der bugtede sig ned i det tætte Buskads. I Plænen, hvor der
var mange smaa, hvide, uvedkommende Bellis, stod en Sandstensvase med
knækket Hank.

Kammerjunkeren gik nedad Trinene; Vedbenden havde trængt sig frem og
laa i lange Skud over de graa Sten.

Han gik forbi den straatækte Volière, der var tom, hen til det gamle,
forfaldne Lysthus, hvor Ranker og halvvilde Planter i én frodig
Fylde, som Efteraaret havde mærket, væltede sig ud over de Stænger,
der dannede Veranda foran Døren.

Gu' Fader i Himlen -- og alt dette skulde ryddes!

De kunde gerne have ladet ham dø først!

Kammerjunkeren vilde slippe for den Følelse, som nagede ham, og greb
derfor en flygtig Tanke, der ved Synet af Lysthuset gled igennem hans
Hjerne.

Det var her, de havde overrasket dem med at staa og synge --
Løjtnanterne og de nydelige Frøkner Krog -- den Aften -- ved
Assembleen, da Generalinden havde bedt ham føre Selskabet en
Promenade ned forbi Lysthuset.

Hvor længe kunde det vel være siden?

Generalinde Krog var død i to og treds og den Aften -- hvad Aar var
nu det? Det var et Par Dage efter Klubballet, da de havde maattet
give efter for Tiden og det ny og optage Byens største Skibsrheder
med Familie.

Da de valsede, havde Generalinden sagt paa sin uforlignelige Maade:

»Kammerjunker von Bang, i Aften er jeg med til Klubbens Begravelse.«

»Min Naadige mener?«

»De opfører sig jo meget net, disse Skipperdøtre, men -- det er dog
Skipperdøtre.« --

Kammerjunkeren gik videre.

Hvordan mon han var kommen til at tænke paa det nu?

Det var jo saa mange, mange Aar siden, dengang alt var helt
anderledes end senere. --

Da von Bang var ude af Tjeneste og boede i Ro paa Carolinelyst, havde
han af et godt Gemyt og med et praktisk militært Greb taget fat paa
Velgørenheden, sammensmeltet forskellige Foreninger og bragt System
i dem. Han arbejdede selv meget, undersøgte med minutiøs Omhu, førte
omfangsrige Regnskaber med mange Bilag og kunde til enhver Tid bringe
paalidelige Oplysninger.

Kammerjunkeren færdedes i den Anledning ofte paa Gaden og havde mange
at hilse. Og ingen hilste saa ærbødigt og fuldendt smukt som den
gamle Kavaller.

Velgørenhedsværket, der hver Dag førte Kammerjunkeren ind til Byen,
gav om Aftenen ham og Datteren Stof til lange, jævnt glidende
Samtaler.

Datteren, -- hvem Troen paa, at Lykkens lunefulde Spil ikke leger
med Sjæle, havde gjort blid og taalmodig, -- var i nær og hjærtelig
Forbindelse med de smaa i Søndagsskolen, og den særegne Evne hun
havde til overalt at finde formildende Omstændigheder, hjalp over de
Gærder af Ærgelse og Haabløshed, som enkelte Klienters Drukkenskab og
Løgnagtighed højnede for Kammerjunkerens Fod. --

Men det var ikke nogle af den Slags Sorger, som i denne Morgen
slappede den gamle Herres Træk, medens han trippede rundt i sin
Have, hvor Vedbenden kravlede i de høje, gamle Træers øverste Grene,
hvor Buskadserne var brede og tætte som Underskov, og hvor Mosset i
Gangene kun i Midten var delvist afslidt.

Der var kommen en underlig Lammelse over ham, og dog drev en indre
Uro ham rundt overalt paa hele Ejendommen.

Af og til lukkedes et af Vinduerne i den høje Stueetage paa Klem, og
Kirsten kigede ud efter den gamle Herre, der gik saa ilsomt, men saa
besværligt.

»Der er Slu'er i Valsen i Dau! Bare Frøkenen snart kommer a' Skole!«
tænkte hun og sukkede, saa det knagede i Hægterne paa den brune
Hvergarnskjole.

Kammerjunkeren kom ind i Stuen. Hvor han var træt!

Uvilkaarligt gik han den vante Vej hen til Lænestolen bag
Blomsterbordet.

Han satte sig, fik Benet lagt op paa Gyngeskamlen, Tæppet, der laa
parat, bredt over Benene, Armen støttet mod Vindueskarmen. Den gamle
Herre aandede dybt. Det gjorde godt at komme til Ro paa den vante
Plads.

Næsten straks rejste han sig uroligt igen.

Der var saa meget, han skulde have udrettet. Først og fremmest maatte
han nu begynde at tænke paa, hvilke af Møblerne han bedst kunde
skille sig af med .... dem alle fik de jo ikke Plads til, naar de nu
flyttede ind i en ny Lejlighed.

Han gik rundt i Stuen, men syntes ikke, han kunde bestemme sig.

Den Stol havde hans Fader selv sat frem til ham den ene Gang, han kom
hjem -- træt af den lange Køretur -- i Besøg fra Landkadetakademiet.

I den Sofa sad hans Hustru, da de, ved Juleselskabet hos hans
Forældre, blev forlovede.

Nej, det var bedst at begynde inde i Havestuen.

Kammerjunkeren standsede ved et lille, tyndbenet Bord, hvor der stod
en indrammet Blyantsskitse, som højsalig Kong Frederik den Syvende
havde tegnet og foræret hans Kone. Paa Væggen over det hang et
Billede af Kongen i rød Fez, blaa Vaabenfrakke og hvide Benklæder.
-- Farverne løb i et for Kammerjunkerens Øjne.

Gu' Fader i Himlen, han vidste nok, hvad det betød, -- i Nat havde
hans salig Kone vist sig for ham, som da Wilhelmines Barn døde ovre
i Jylland.

Ja, ja, ja -- Marie Frederikke blev ene. Hvis hun havde taget
Ritmesteren i sin Tid; ak ja. Men hun vilde jo ikke.

Saa havde _han_ ogsaa været en ensom, gammel Mand i alle disse Aar.

Inde i den anden Stue stod Kirsten og bearbejdede to daddelløse
Messingdørhaandtag, saa at Solen skinnede med hvidgule Blink i det
riflede blanke og i den vaceformede Topfigur, naar hun drejede sig
lidt bort for at se efter Kammerjunkeren.

Nu kom han igen stavrende ind og gik frem og tilbage mellem Datterens
Sybord i Vinduesfordybningen og det gamle, lave Klaver, der saa let
kom til at klirre.

»Hva' lysser Kamerjaankeri etter?« Kirsten mente, det var paa Tide at
faa en Ende paa denne urolige Vandren om.

»Jeg rører mig kun en Smule, Kirsten, en Smule.«

»Ve' Kamerjaankeri ikke ha' Kaffen herind? Je' har den te'reds.«

»Tak Go'e, jeg ska'nte ha' noget.«

Kirsten stod lidt. Det gik vel ikke an længere at sysle med
Dørlaasene.

»Ja--a, -- saa maa je' vel se at faa mig flyttet te' mit.«

Kirsten gik.

Kammerjunkeren satte sig i Lænestolen ved det midterste Vindue og saa
ud i Haven, hvor Flaget vajede paa halv Stang, og alle de brune og
gule Blade hang stille i den klare, rene Luft; der kom kun Bevægelse,
naar et løsnede sig og langsomt dalede nedad.

Med tynd Klang slog Uhret henne paa Konsollen ti.

Kammerjunkeren lukkede Vinduet paa Klem.

Lidt efter begyndte Klokkeklangen fra alle Byens Kirker at komme
sejlende med deres store, skønne Alvor og fylde Stuen med Vemod og
Højtid.

Klokkerne oppe over de travle Gader ringede, fordi Dronning Louise
laa Lig paa Bernstorff.

Kammerjunkerens Tanker, der i denne Morgen var springske og
uberegnelige, gik pludselig langt tilbage i Tiden.

Han saa Dronningen foran sig, som hun ved Sølvbryllupet kom vandrende
gennem Christiansborgs pragtfulde Sal ved Kongens Arm fulgt af
Slægten. Kammerjunkeren havde dengang et Øjeblik glemt Dronningen for
at se paa Kvinden -- hendes Bevægelsers Skønhed, hendes Øjes Liv og
Munds Smil.

Og nu laa hun saa urørlig stille blandt alle Blomsterne paa
Bernstorff. Ja, ja, Tiden gaar, og meget forandres. Hans gamle Gaard
rives ned, hans Jord stykkes ud, og han selv rejser bort.

Tiden, alles strenge Herre.

Tiden -- gaar --. Ti--den -- gaar. -- -- Kammerjunkeren havde blundet
lidt.

Nu vaagnede han og lyttede forundret til de dybe, rungende Klokkeslag.

Han var iskold, men tænkte ikke videre paa det, for -- hvor de
Klokker ringede!

Marie Frederikke skulde dog ogsaa høre dem. Nu ringede de sagtere og
sagtere og steg højere og højere op i Luften.

Han forstyrrede ikke Klokkeklangen, naar han vinkede ganske stille ad
hende. Han løftede Armen, men den hang slapt ned, som tynget af Bly.
Langsomt og saa dejligt ringede de, men sagtere og sagtere; nu maatte
hun komme, ellers fik hun dem ikke at høre, -- de var saa højt oppe.

Besværligt drejede han Hovedet ind mod Stuen.

Rummet var skinnende lyst, og det lille Tæppe inde under Midterbordet
var langt, langt borte.

Men nu sank han dybt i lune, bløde Dun; det blev saa mørkt, som om en
lagde sin Haand over hans Øjne; han forsøgte at løfte Hovedet for at
lytte -- Klokkerne -- de ringede dejligt, men saa svagt.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Senere drejedes Laasen, Døren lindedes forsigtigt paa Klem, og
Kirsten paa Hosesokker stak Hovedet inden for.

Saa slap hun Døren og løb hen til sin gamle Herre, der sad i sin
Lænestol og var død.

Andægtig blev hun staaende, medens Taare efter Taare gled ned over de
runde, røde Kinder, og Snøft efter Snøft brød Stilheden.

Omsider sagde hun langsomt og inderligt:

»Herregu', det var da ny'eligt, han ku' dejse af inden Flyttedau!«

Hun tørrede sin Haand i Forklædet og trykkede med kærlig Omhu
Kammerjunkerens Øjne til.




DEN DRISTIGE.


Aarets sidste Timer randt langsomt ud i den uendelige Ensomhed.

Inden Døre søgte Menneskene sammen -- Frænder og Venner, Husbondsfolk
og Tyende, Lavsbrødre og Landsknægtenes hjemløse Skarer.

Men en var alene inden for Stadens brede Mure.

Det var en ung Kvinde, der sad i et Kammer øverst oppe under det
røde, spidse Tag paa en af de ældste Gaarde.

Bysvenden, der stod ved Porten den Dag, hun kom dragende, fik at
vide, at hendes Navn var Audacia. Ellers kendte ingen hende, og ingen
frittede, naar hun ærbart gik sin Gang til Brønden eller til Kirken.
--

Audacia stod ved Kammervinduet, som aabnede sit lille, trekantede Øje
højt oppe over Karnapper og brede Gadetrapper midt paa det store Tag.

Set gennem det grønne, tykke Glar, der sad rundt og fast mellem
Blyet, blegnede Stjernerne til sære, formummede Blink.

Derfor slog hun Vinduet op og holdt sit Ansigt hen mod den friske
Luftstrøm, der vældede ind fra den frostklare Nat.

Længe saa hun ud over de mange snedækkede Tages stejle Skraaninger
med brede, rygende Skorstene og hvide Snebaand paa Trappegavlenes
Trin.

Hendes Blik gled ned i den snevre Gyde, der overfor hendes Vindue
mundede ud paa Torvet.

Ved Bislag og Vinduesskodder var der tynde Lysstriber. Klang af
Menneskestemmer, Instrumenter og klirrende Tinkander ringlede fra
Værtshuset ud i Luften; der stod en Halvdør paa Klem lige under
den skiltende Krone, som hang urørlig og snepudret i den snørklede
Jernarm.

Men om Torvebrønden stod ingen sladrende og leende Piger, ingen
steg op ad Kirkens brede Stentrin, ingen gik forbi dernede med
lygtebærende Tjenere.

Alle var inden Døre med dem, som Livet havde stillet dem nær.

Ingen sov den Nat.

Alle ventede det ny Aar. Ventede, at dets første Minut skulde dale
med Klokkeklangen ned over deres gamle By.

Alle var inden Døre, for kun der kunde Narrebjælderne rasle og støje
og overdøve den sælsomme, uvante Spørgen og Manen, der besatte
Sindene, saasnart der blev stille. --

Gennem et Vindue i Borgmesters pyntelige Gavl kunde Audacia se ind i
Salen, hvor Raadmændene var bænkede om brede Borde og tømte Vinen af
ærværdige Rømere.

Ingen sov i denne Nat. Alle ventede Indtoget af det ny Aar, som
maaske i sit Følge havde alt godt efter enhvers Begær.

Saadan havde de ogsaa ventet for et Aar siden, ventet hos
Borgmesters, i Lavshusene, i Kipper og lune Stuer og fattige Boder
Byen over.

Ventet længselsfuldt.

Audacias Øjne funklede!

_Kunde_ hun gemme hele Verden i en lun Favn, hvor Sorger og Nød kun
drog forbi som store, fjerne Skyer!

Kunde hun give sit Brysts Varme til Ly for al Kulde og Kval! --

De havde sunget og jublet i Glansen af den store Forventning. Den
dyreste Hyldest, den mest troende Tillid havde de ødslet paa det
kommende Aar.

Men det havde bragt mangen ung Jomfru Sot og beske Lægedrikke i
Stedet for Brudgom og Bryllupsgilde, mangen værdig Borger Forlis paa
Gods og Ære, mangen tapper Krigsknægt Lemlæstelse og Død for Bytte og
lystige Plyndringstog.

Og nu ventede de igen! Ventede, medens de jublede og pokulerede for
at døve deres Øren for den alvorsfulde Manen, der sivede ind fra den
store, tavse Nat, der laa som en Jernarm om deres Verden.

Men der var vel ogsaa dem, der ventede i en Længsel, som neppe kunde
drive Timerne paa Dør, og som gjorde Nætterne lange som Uger, ventede
paa en Lykke, der kunde sprænge Tungsindets svære Fængselsporte,
lyttede efter trøstende Svar paa alle hemmelige Suk og angstfulde
Spørgsmaal. Ventede med samme Længsel som de andre Aar, men med
sygere Haab!

Audacias Medfølelse slog ud i Lue.

Aah, om hun kunde frelse dem fra al lidelsesfuld Uvished om den
Herre, som holdt for Porten for at ride inden for Bymuren, naar
Midnatsklokken slog.

Hendes Blod brændte.

Knugende Syner stod for hendes Blik:

Ensomme, angstfulde, bøjede Mennesker, der med deres Sjæls sidste
Kraft higede efter et læskende Haab.

Hærstore Flokke, der forvirret og smerteligt uklart længtes efter den
Haabets Ild, der skulde smelte Sløvhedens og Forhærdelsens Lænker om
deres tyngede Sind.

Skare efter Skare, der som Tiggere saa ind i Fremtiden!

Da fór en altforglemmende Trang til Klarhed over den kommende Tids
Dunkelhed som en viljehærdende Ild igennem hende.

Ud i den tavse, hvide Nat? Sprænge alle Rimelighedens Skranker!
Opsøge det, som omspændte Verden for at sænke sig over den ved Midnat!

Vriste Visheden fra _Tiden_ selv!

Audacia steg hastigt ned ad de mange Trapper, ilede gennem snevre
Gyder til en forglemt Laage i Bymuren; hun vred i den rustne Slaa,
til den gav efter, og hun trængte sig gennem snetunge, filtrede,
tørre Ranker, til hun stod udenfor Byens hegnende Værn.

Hvidt og øde laa Landet foran hende.

Og den mørke Himmel lukkede som et fast, stjerneprikket Hvælv
derover, et natligt Hvælv uden en eneste fattig Stribe af den sunkne
Sols Guld.

Audacia kastede sig ud i Mørket som i et Hav af Fare. Menneskenes
Sorger knugede hende. Menneskenes Længsler skar i hende, og hele
hendes Sind var fyldt af mægtig Kærlighed til de, som angstfulde
stirrede ind i den kommende Tid.

Hun ilede frem i Mørket. Kulden strammede sig haardt sammen om hendes
Legeme -- hun ejede ikke et Vaaben mod Vilddyrene, hun kendte ikke
Sti over den vide Hede eller gennem de mørke Kløfter, men endnu
havde hun ikke mødt den store tavse Hersker, _Tiden_, der ene kunde
bringe Lys, og derfor ilede hun frem, saa ustandseligt, som om den
Medlidelse, der brændte i hende, kunde bære som Vingepar.

-- Før Midnat stod Audacia ved Tidens Borg.

Saa truende sælsom rejste den sig i Mørket, at hun i Rædsel løb og
løb, flygtende fra det Maal, hun havde higet imod med en Vilje, der
havde været stærkere end alle Hindringer. Audacia piskede sit Mod med
Selvforagtens hvasseste Svøbe, men Rædslen jog hende vildt paa Flugt.

Da mindedes hun, at i Billedsniderens Stue sad en ung Hustru og
ventede. Paa fjerde Aar -- ensom mellem Værktøj og halvfærdige
Helgenbilleder og indtørrede Lerklumper, ventede paa Mesteren selv,
der vandrede gennem fjerne Lande for i et varmere Sollys at suge
Lykke ind i sin tunge Kunstnersjæl.

Paa fjerde Aar! Og i Nat sad hun i Mesterens Stol ved Ilden og
vaagede; med Ære vilde hun tage mod den Gæst, som maaske skulde
bringe den lykkelige Gensynstime.

Atter ildnede Medlidelsen Audacia; den kolde Angst veg, og modigt
søgte hun tilbage til Tidens Borg.

Over en svajende Bro, gennem den lange mørke Port, hvor Lyden af
hendes lette Trin slog hult og forstærket mod Hvælvingen, naaede hun
ind i Borgen.

Usynlige Rædsler holdt Vagt i hver Krog. Skræmmende Stemmer truede
bag hver Dør. Klam og solforladt strøg Luften over hendes Ansigt og
Hænder.

Audacia tænkte paa Billedsniderens unge Hustru, og hun famlede sig
modigt frem ad snevre Gange og stejle Trapper, der vindede sig opad
i knugende Mørke.

Tilsidst stødte hendes fremstrakte Hænder mod en Dør, der gav efter
for deres Tryk og langsomt drejedes, medens et gulblegt Lys spredte
sig som et Straalebundt ud mod hende.

Audacia traadte ind i et dybt Rum. Ned fra den skyggede Hvælving
hængte mærkelige Dyr i svære Tov, og Dunkelheden i Krogene dækkede
over hemmelighedsfulde Instrumenter og lænkede, tykke Bøger.

Foran det store Ildsted saa hun Ryggen af den, hun saa møjsomt havde
søgt, -- _Tiden_ selv. Bøjet og hvidhaaret syslede han med Kolber og
Digler og alskens sært skinnende og boblende Væsker.

Paa Timeglasset sad en blind Ravn; den slog med Vingerne, da Audacia
skød Døren til.

Han vendte sig fra Ilden.

Det ældste, det uudgrundeligste, som ej nævnes kan, aabenbaredes i
disse tankehærdede Træk, i dette hvasse Blik under den mægtige Pandes
hvide Kant.

Audacia lukkede sine Øjne og lagde Haanden over dem. Thi den Visdom,
som straalede imod hende fra dette Aasyn, sved i hende.

Men hun æggede sit Mod ved at tænke sig staaende ved Bybrønden,
skænkende modige Mænd og Kvinder Visheden i Bytte for den usle,
løgnagtige Forventning.

Og hun spurgte med al den Kraft, som hendes hede, barmhjærtige Vilje
skabte.

Han løftede Haanden, saa det sorte Ærme faldt tilbage. Myndigt pegede
han mod en lav Dør inderst i Hvælvingen:

»Vent der, sammen med de Svende og Terner, som jeg vil sende ud over
al Verden i Midnatstimen!«

Audacia traadte ind i et mørkt Rum.

Hun famlede sig frem langs Panelet, fulgte det, da det drejede om et
Hjørne ind i en Vinduesfordybning.

Det puslede og lo, stønnede og raslede i alle Stuens Kroge.

Der var ingen snelys Mark at skimte gennem Ruden.

Audacia aandede paa den, men Isen smeltede ikke. Hun lagde sine varme
Læber mod Isblomsternes tomme Kalke, men de veg ikke, der var ingen
Lysning i dette tætte Mørke.

Da aabnede _Tiden_ Døren og traadte ind. Foran paa den sorte Talar
holdt han en Lygte; igennem dens Hornruder flimrede et dunkelt Skær
op om hans hvide Skæg og stærke Aasyn.

Audacia spurgte atter modigt.

Den ældgamle svarede:

»Vent, til min Herre byder mig at tale.«

Og han satte Lygten, gik bort og lukkede Døren.

Det gule, dunkle Skær gled videre og videre ud, blev klarere og
klarere, indtil den store Hal straalede som i Lyset af tusinde Kærter.

Hallen var fuld af sælsomme Skikkelser, _Tidens Svende_ og _Terner_.

En bredskuldret, muskelstærk Mand nærmede sig hende.

Med kloge, rolige Ord fortalte han Navnene paa Tidens Budbringere.

Selv hed han _Erfaring_.

Audacia saa ikke længe paa den lyse _Lykke_, det vidunderskønne
_Haab_, hvis Ansigt straalede af Mod og Godhed, eller paa det blide
_Taalmod_ med de ædle, kraftige Skuldre og de favnende, støttende
Arme.

Det var de rædselsfulde, gruopvækkende Skikkelser, som mest drog
hendes Blik.

Bag _Misundelses_ gustne, onde Fjæs øjnede hun _Pestens_ sorte,
stinkende, blinde Hoved. _Mordbrands_ hadefulde Øjne flakkede
usikkert, hans filtrede Haar hang ned om den lave, dyriske Pande og
ideligt klemte han Læben sammen om de brede Tænder, der gned mod
hverandre.

Det ubarmhjærtige _Uvejr_ støttede sin stærke Krop mod den
haardhændede, knoglede _Sult_. _Skuffelsens_ visne, sammenkrogede
Skikkelse sneg sig om ved Siden af _Ligegyldighedens_ fede, oppustede
Krop, der trampede frem uden at se, hvor den ødelæggende satte sine
brede Fødder.

Audacia bævede. Hvilket Under maatte der ikke ske, hvis Menneskene
skulde bevare deres Sjæle i en Verden, hvor der truede saadanne
Farer. Hun krympede sig i den mørkeste Haabløshed; Fortvivlelsen
flængede i hendes Sind. Hvert Pulsslag raabte jo Haan mod Menneskenes
Afmagt og Forsvarsløshed. --

Da veg alt hos hende for en pludselig skabt vild Trang til at
udslette sin egen Sjæl, tvinge den til at briste som en Boble, der
intet Spor efterlader sig.

I denne Nød skete det, at hun modstandsløst maatte se op! Den skønne,
værdige Kvinde, hvis Navn var _Taalmod_, stod foran hende og sænkede
lindrende og smeltende sit Blik i hendes, til Sindets vilde Haardhed
var borte.

Audacia saa op i den Mægtiges Øjne; der luede kraftfuld, kærlig Alvor
og modig Godhed, der ikke var greben med Lethed i et Øjeblik for at
slippes i det næste, men vunden i haarde Stormløb og baaren frelst ud
af svidende Smerter.

Audacia fyldtes af ny Kraft, og hun vendte sig atter mod de
frygtelige Skikkelser for at uddrikke den Erfarings Skaal, som raktes
hende. --

_Selvforgudelsen_ knejsede hos sin Tvillingebroder, den lave,
vraltende, snaksomme _Dumhed_.

_Ukærligheden_ havde sat sin plumpe Fod paa Nakken af en skøn Dreng,
_Glæden_, der, lykkelig ved Kamp, spændte sit unge, ædle Legeme under
den raa Byrde.

Som et lurende, begærligt Dyr stod _Ondskabens_ behændige Skikkelse
paa Spring, rede til at fare løs paa enhver, som den kunde naa.
Bagved -- bange for sit Skind -- gemte den gustne, vanskabte
_Bagtalelse_ med de flakkende Øjne sig.

En mæsket, lavpandet Skikkelse, _Dovenskaben_, gik rundt og havde
venlige Ord til alle. Men med Rædsel saa Audacia, at hvor han nærmede
sig, smuldredes Træet og søndredes Gulvets og Murens Sten; den vimse
_Ihærdighed_ og den tavse, stærke _Hjælpsomhed_ arbejdede med Hast i
hans Spor, at ikke Hallen skulde styrte sammen om dem alle.

_Mistænksomhed_ krøb sammen i en ensom Krog og rugede beængstet over
sin Giftflaske.

Med sammenbidte Læber og blodunderløbne Øjne sad _Vold_ hos den
vindtørre _Gerrighed_, der fredløs og ængstelig holdt med sine lange,
knoglede Fingre om sin Broder _Volds_ blodplettede Arme.

Men opad Væggen og henunder Hvælvingen lysnede et Genskin af
_Dødens_, _Sandhedens_ og _Kærlighedens_ mægtige Herskerskikkelser,
der svævede ude i den stjernelyse Nat, rede til at lyde _Tidens_ Bud.

Og _Indignationen_, en ungdomsfrisk, skøn Mand med varme, faste Øjne
og et staalblankt Spyd i sin kraftige Haand stod som en frygtløs Helt
midt inde blandt alle de onde Skikkelser.

_Løgnagtigheden_ sneg sig rundt sammen med en dukket, vrikkende
Kvindeskikkelse, _Sledskeriet_; de sluttede Venskab med hver som gad;
deres hvidgule Ansigter var stivnede og udtryksløse, og deres syge,
væmmelige Hænder besudlede, hvad de rørte ved. Med løgnagtig venlige
Lader nærmede de sig Audacia; hendes Hjærte nagedes af Smerte over
dette Misbrug af ædelt jordisk Væsen; nu stod de hende nær, og Flokke
af Ord om Godhed og Troskab udgik fra dem.

Da flygtede Audacia sjæleangst ind til den Ældgamle, som Gud havde
sat til Hersker over disse forfærdelige Budbringere.

Stor og ubevægelig stod han foran Baalet paa Ildstedet. Han sagde:

»Hør da, hvorhen mine Svende og Terner efter min Herres Bud skal
drage, i hvilke Hjærter de skal trænge ind, i hvilke Hjem de skal
tage Hæderspladsen!«

Bønfaldende strakte Audacia Armene ud:

»Din Herre tilgive mig, og tilgiv Du min formastelige Spørgen. Jeg
beder Dig af hele mit Hjærte, lad ikke mig, lad ingen vide, hvem Du
vil sende ind i vor By i det ny Aars Følge. Straf ikke min Oprørskhed
mod Din store Herres Verdensordning med Viden om de kommende Ting!«

Og i dybeste Bevægelse sank hun ned foran den Ældgamle.

Da aabnede han Døren, kaldte paa _Taalmod_ og pegede paa Audacia.

Den skønne, mægtige Kvinde løftede hende i sine Arme og gik ud af
Døren. Langsomt gik hun frem, Mørket kløvede sig som to vigende
Bølgerækker for den dæmpede Klarhed, der kronede hendes alvorlige
Pande.

Hen under Stjernehimlen bar hun det trætte Menneske mod Hjemmet.

Audacias Hjærte slog stille mod _Taalmods_ roligt aandende Bryst; der
dalede en forunderlig mild Kraft ned over hende fra disse alvorligt
glade Øjne, der snart saa vidt og ømt ud over Jorden, snart fæstede
sig i stille, længselsfuld Lykke mod Stjernebillederne paa den
fjerne, mørke Himmel. -- -- --

Det gamle Aars sidste Øjeblik veg bort.

En bølgende, mangfoldig rungende og klingende Toneskare svang sig ud
over Staden fra alle dens høje Taarne.

_Taalmod_ skred ind i den ensomme Stue oppe under Taget; Ilden
flammede lysnende op, og usynlige Blomster duftede sødt og stærkt.

Klokkeringningen hørte op. Men Luften bar en Stund paa Lyden, der
bævede sagte og tonende.

Audacias hele Sind favnede med ydmyg Undren om den dybe Fred og
Fortrøstning, som var givet hende som en kostelig Gave.

Hun fornam Visheden om, at den, der havde baaren hende over de døde,
kolde Snesletter, kunde beskærme mod alt det, som ødelæggende sneg
sig ind paa Menneskene, løb Storm mod deres Fred og gjorde deres Maal
lave og deres Verden snever og kold. Og Audacia bad:

»Kom til mig, naar min Sjæl knuges af Mørket, saa den fattig og
afmægtig glemmer Lyset! Kom til mig, Du, som er størst af alle Tidens
Sendebud!«

Taalmod svarede:

»Min Gerning er kun at bane Vej til Menneskenes Hjærter for dem, som
er større end jeg, og som evner at skænke det Højeste.«

Som et svindende Billede stod den lyse Skikkelse i Døraabningen. Saa
ædelt, saa mildt som dæmpet Spil over Strenge tonede hendes sidste
Ord:

»Kald paa mig, og jeg kommer!«




KAPTAJNENS DATTER.


Solskin over toppede, smaa Bølger, over den nybyggede, hvidmalede
Skonnertbrig, der glider langsomt gennem Sundet ud fra den fynske
Søkøbstad med det ene Kirketaarn og de mange røde Tage; Solskin, der
faar selve Røgen fra den lille Damper, der slæber Skonnerten ud, til
at se munter ud, Solskin over Vimpler og Flags rødt og hvidt, over de
feststemte Mennesker ombord og de skovklædte Kyster og de grønne Øer.

Skonnertbriggens Kaptajn er en stor lyshaaret og lysskægget Mand med
skarpe, blaa Øjne og en vældig Latter, der i Dag hvert Øjeblik faar
Lov til at runge; han er glad i disse Timer, befinder sig saa vel
i sin Rolle som Vært for Rhedere med Familie og Venner, der følge
Sundet ud og senere vil tage tilbage med den lille Slæber.

Ude i det fjerne ligger Havet! Havet, hvor han skal vise, at han
er den dristigste af alle Byens og Øernes Kaptajner; han forstaar
lige saa godt at tumle Negrene, der paa Kysten af Afrika hjælpe
med Indladningen af Palmeolie, som Consulen i Liverpool og Folkene
ombord.

Og saa er der det ... han kniber det ene Øje lidt sammen, medens det
blinker lunt i det andet ... at Mutter skal med Gæsterne tilbage.

Vist holder han af sin Kone ... men nu har han gaaet hjemme et halvt
Aar, drevet om ved Skibsbyggeriet og smaaskændtes med Mester ...
taget et Glas med gode Venner, og ikke altid har han havt let ved at
bøje sig under Mutters Tugt og de ensformige Smaastadsforhold. Derfor
er der noget lokkende i dette: igen at skulle ud alene, være fri for
Sludder baade fra den ene og fra den anden Kant ... ud at besøge hans
sorte Majestæt i Afrika, ud til ensomme, drømmende Timer i Kahytten,
naar Passaten fylder »Neptuns« tyve svulmende Sejl.

Ensomme Timer!

Ja. -- Stemningen slaar med ét om, og Vemoden kruser hans Sinds Glæde
som en Iling en lys, blank Flade.

Saa skal han ikke se Kone og Barn i flere Aar. Og i den Tid skal
Pigebarnet konfirmeres.

Han vilde nok have været hjemme den Dag, gaaet ved hendes Side op
ad Kirkegulvet, hørt hendes Svar til Præsten og senere -- i en
Kreds af Slægt og Venner -- udtalt noget af det, som vilde fylde
hans Hjærte paa en saadan Dag, hvor hans eneste Barn traadte ind
til Livets Sorger og Fristelser og selv overtog Ansvaret for sine
Handlinger. Aah, hun skulde nok klare sig! Saadan en dansk, kærnesund
Sømandsdatter; for det var hun; smuk og høj, lys og kæk, ikke
bange for et oprigtigt Svar, naar han havde faaet lidt for meget
af Disciplinen med hjem i de smaa, sirlige Stuer ... men god og
hjælpsom, rask paa Hænderne og flink til Læsning. Se, hvor net hun nu
staar og taler med Konsulinden; -- nu lægger hun Shawlet om den gamle
Dames Skuldre, -- Hans Holgersen henter en Pøs, der kan bruges som
Skammel.

Ham har han selv taget sig af de Par Aar, Knægten har faret til
Søs. Det er ikke blot pæne Manerer, han har lært ham, men ogsaa
Sømandsskab. Og det, saa det kan forslaa: -- den Jungmand kan skære
boven Læsejls Fald bedre end mangen Matros og lægge en Stikbout, der
nok skal dy sig for at glide under Raaen.

Ja, Gu' forstaar Kaptajn Martin Frederiksen at faa Skik paa sine
Gutter og Orden i sit Skib. ... Vent nu bare, til han kanske om nogle
Aar faar et større med Salon, Piano, Sovekahytter og Badekammer.
Saa kan han ha' Passagerer med. Det kunde jo hænde, at der blandt
dem var en ung, smuk Dame, som særlig blev ham anbefalet; -- hun
vil forbavses over, hvor Kaptajn Frederiksen er en dannet Mand med
Interesser, en Mand, med hvem man kan underholde sig ... Saa giver
hun ham sit Billede til Afsked og Tak. Han hænger det paa Væggen i
sin Kahyt, og Toldembedsmænd og Faktoribestyrere sidde og forelske
sig i det, naar de komme ombord hos ham ... Han skal vide at være den
sikre Beskytter, den ærlige, jævne Sømand mod en hvilkensomhelst
ung Lady, der betror sig til ham og hans Skib. Bærer han dog ikke
-- trods alle sine mange og store Fejl -- en Stræben i sig mod »det
store Ubekendte«.

Saaledes kalder han det, som han stadig tror paa og beder til, men
ikke mere vil kalde ved det Navn, han brugte, da han var Barn. --
Han rives ud af sine Drømmerier, idet én slaar ham klaskende paa
Skulderen:

»Du er da 'tte søsyg, Kaptajn? Du ser saa spekulativ u'!«

»Sikken et Vejr, Jensen, se paa de hvide Skyer og se, hvor Solen
skinner derinde paa Kirkegavlen og Rugmarken paa Bakken!«

»Ja, det begynder at blive lunkent; jeg sve'er Tran i min
Søndagsjakke.«

»Aah, Du er en født Prosaikker, Jensen, som ikke tænker paa dit
Fødelands Dejlighed mer end som --«

»Naa, det var da lige rent Mel ud af Posen, men vi kan jo være lige
go'e Venner for det. Og Du _har_ nu lagt or'entlig i Kakelonen for
vos, Martin Frederiksen,« skæmter den tykke Guldsmed, der er bekendt
for at være en Fa'ens vittig Ra'.

»Ja varmt er det.«

»La' vos nu faa Øller paa Dækket, og kom Du saa hen og gør en bitte
Stads af Pe'ersen omme fra Torvet, for han er li'e ved at revne af
Misundelse over det, at Mads Baron sitter og blærer sig af sit ny
Butiksengventarium.«

-- I en munter Kreds henne ved den store Vandtønde begynder
Guldsmeden at fortælle:

»Ser I, det er sgu sandt, saa kommer der forleden saadan en temmelig
før Bondepige ind til mig, i Botekken, forstaar I. Du ska'te grine
endnu, Du -- Rosinpiller. Hva' skal De ha', Jomfru, siger jeg. Ja,
je' sku' da keve en Felovlsring til Jacob Hansen. Siger hun, forstaar
I. Naa, jeg faar jo saa en go' stor en frem. Ja, siger hun, jeg vil
jo saa gerne ha' stafferet en bitte Stads i den, siger hun. Ja, hvad
skal det saa være? Jeg har tænkt: hans Navn og mit Navn. Ja, siger
jeg saa -- for at høre mere, forstaar I, -- skal der saa staa mere?
Jo, jeg vilde saa urimelig gerne ha' hans Hjæ-ærte og mit Hjæ-ærte.«

Her lagde Jensen skælmskt Hovedet paa Siden og sang endnu mere paa
det, end han plejede. »Ja, siger jeg saa, er der saa ikke mere? siger
jeg, helt forgrint indvendig, kan I regne u'. Jo, hvis der er Plads,
sku' der gerne to Duer, der næbbes. Ja, er der saa ikke mere. Jo --
hans Hand og min Hand. Er der saa ikke mere? Nej.«

Den skraldende Latter, der lønnede Guldsmeden, gjorde ham helt
forhippet; han raabte højt for at overdøve de muntre Herrer.

»Jamen, jamen vær nu stille, kender I den om Bonden i det kongelige
Theater?«

»Det nunsæns har du fortaalt saa tidt!« kom det gnavent fra Skomager
Jespersen.

»Sikke no'et Slu'er. Op med den Jensen.«

»Ja, det er sgu sandt -- den er passeret« -- og saa fortæller Jensen
ivrigt, ligetil der kommer en Smule Luftning, og Ordren lyder til at
hejse Storsejlet for at hjælpe paa den lille Damper der forude ...

Folkene blive til deres store Morskab puffede væk fra Arbejdet af
Herrerne, der ere blevne overstadigt muntre af Øl og Søluft, og som
nu give sig til at hale under meget uens faldende ohi ohøj ... -- --

Kaptajnens Datter, Marie, har listet sig ned i Kahytten.

Hun retter ved Væggens Billeder, føler med Hænderne ind i Faderens
Køje, om Køjeklæderne ere stuvede ordentligt ned; hun løfter
Medicinkassens gule Laag og ser paa alle Smaaflaskerne. Oppe i Reolen
staar Lægebogen, som Kaptajnen raadfører sig med, naar de ude i rum
Sø eller ved de usunde Kystpladser inde paa Varmen faar Sygdom. Marie
tænker paa, at de siger, at hendes Fader har et eget Greb paa at
klare Folkene fra Sumpfeberen.

Hvem skal hjælpe ham, hvis han bliver syg? Styrmanden. Bare han er
sikker. -- Hans Holgersen! Hans Fader var Skolelærer; han er vist
mere klog paa den Slags; hans Ansigt ser da ud til det.

Bare Fader slet ikke blev syg.

Naada! Havde Fader ikke sagt, da de hjemme sagde rigtig Farvel:
»Ingen Flæben vil jeg se ombord for alle de Herrer og Damer.« Og saa
var Taarerne trillet helt ned i hans Skæg.

Desuden var det jo ikke første Gang, at hun tog Afsked. Det var hun
jo vant til fra lille af. -- Marie skubbede sig ind i Sofaen og satte
sig til Rette.

Der var egentlig noget dejligt i disse Afskedstimer. Saa blev al Kiv
og al Smaasludder glemt, og bagefter havde Moderen og hun at tænke
paa, hvor Fader, som var saa klog, og som forstod saadan at tage
Rhederne, og som kunde holde saa pæne Skaaltaler, hvor han havde sagt
mange kønne Ord ...

I Morges havde han løftet hende helt op fra Gulvet, bedt hende være
god mod Mutter og kaldt hende min Lysalf, min Yndling.

Saadanne Ord var der ingen anden, der brugte. Jo, for Resten ...
forleden Dag havde Hans Holgersen sagt: »Farvel du kære, unge
Jomfru«. Det lød saa smukt, han sagde det paa saadan en nydelig
Maade ...

Det var dog alligevel bedst at sige Farvel hjemme i deres egen Stue.
I London, hvor de undertiden besøgte Faderen og var ombord i nogle
Uger, der var det da meget værre at komme fra hinanden.

Og saa Rejsen hjem.

Turen over Nordsøen, den kunde gaa, men der var ækelt i den tredje
Klasses Jernbanekupé, hvor de havde saa travlt med at passe paa Kurve
og Tasker med Tørklæder, Konkylier og Dyr i Spiritus.

Maries Tanker var i det Øjeblik langt borte fra Gæsterne, Folkene og
hele den festlige Udfart.

Saa rystede hun det af sig, der var faret gennem hendes Hjærne
hernede i den lumre Kahyt og gik igen op i Solskinnet, der blinkede
i Søen, saa det formelig skar i Øjnene ...

Herrerne sled i det med Sejlet, og Marie lo højt ved det Syn. Se nu
til Fuldmægtigen, den Spirrevip, hvor han asede og stønnede og gik
paa, saa han saa arrig ud af bare Iver. Hvor han vilde blive elendig,
om han vidste, at naar han løftede Armene, saa man Skjorten mellem
Bukselinningen og Vesten. Sikken en Ulykke for ham, den Pyntekrukke!
...

Marie vilde sige Farvel til Folkene og gik forud, ... forbi
Konsulinden, -- som havde vendt sig fra Herrerne, der var blevne
hende noget ugenerte, -- forbi nogle Damer, der havde indrettet sig
om en Kaffekande og var venlige mod Kaptajnens Kone.

Maries Humeur forsvandt pludselig.

Saadan de dog i Grunden allesammen var! Akurat ligesom de gik hjemme
til Borgerforeningsbal. Nu skulde Folkenes Familie snart gaa fra
Borde for at komme ind med Lodsens Jolle; hist og her stod en og
anden med rødgrædte Øjne, -- men det lagde Gæsterne nok slet ikke
Mærke til. De kunde da ellers være sikre paa, at det var ikke saa let
at sige Farvel til en Sømand, der skulde være borte i Aarevis. --

Henne ved Falderebet stod Hans Holgersen; hans Øjenbryn havde
trukket sig smerteligt opad, hans Mund bævede. Det var slet ikke
kønt, men Marie syntes, hun havde aldrig før set, hvad for en pæn Gut
han var, -- og saa voksen og alvorlig. Han holdt sin Moder i Haanden,
han kyssede hende flere Gange ... hun sagde noget mellem hvert Kys;
Hans nikkede og græd.

Marie listede stille agter og fik ikke sagt Farvel. --

Solen skinnede paa Badehotellet inde i Land og paa de lysklædte
Skikkelser, der vinkede fra den lange Bro, der løb ud i Søen.

En Mand kom styrtende op paa den lille Høj til Flaget; han løste
Linen, firede Flaget ned og hejste det, firede ned og hejste ... de
derinde hilste det smukke Skib, der skulde ud paa de lange Farter.

Henne ved Rælingen begyndte man at raabe Hurra og svinge med Hattene.

Skomager Jespersens gnavne Bemærkning om, at Værten »ku' ha'
spanderet et Par Kanonslau« druknede i Jubelen, for Folkene faldt ind
med et langt, taktfast Hurra.

Maries Øjne lyste ... det var dog en stor og dejlig Dag; hun saa
beundrende efter sin Fader, der sprang hen til Flaget agter ved
Rattet for at gengælde Hilsenen.

Havde han for stærk Fart, eller tog han for haardt fat!

Den smekre Stang brast, Dannebrog segnede langsomt til Siden.

Det varede kun et Øjeblik for de omstaaende at surre Stangen sammen
og rejse den, men Marie havde som ved et Jag gennem Hjærtet faaet et
uudsletteligt Indtryk af dette Minuts pludselige Stilhed og af den
Ansigtstrækning, som Kaptajnen ikke havde kunnet beherske; naar man
saadan skal ud paa det uvisse, er man tilbøjelig til at tage Varsel
af den mindste Hændelse.

       *       *       *       *       *

Skonnertbriggen »Neptun« var i Aarevis paa de lange Rejser. Men ikke
altid slog det til, hvad der var spaaet i hin Dags mange Festtaler.

Kaptajn Frederiksen beholdt Navnet som den hurtigste Afrikafarer,
men Forhold, som han ikke var Herre over, og som gjorde, at man i de
Aaringer overalt søgte at skille sig af med sine Sejlskibsparter,
var Skyld i, at han stadigt maatte sende daarlige Efterretninger til
Rhederiet.

Heldigvis for ham skulde Skibet ikke Hjemmet nærmere end England; men
selv der følte han sig ikke fri, da hver Dag bragte gnavne Breve med
nærgaaende Spørgsmaal fra Rhederne.

Det var med et Lettelsens Suk, at han, naar han endelig havde
opdrevet et nogenlunde antageligt Tilbud, igen stod til Søs ...

Hans Fremtidsfantasier havde i Aarenes Løb undergaaet en langsom
Forandring, indtil han var naaet til at ønske sig et Embede i Ro
hjemme, i Fyrvæsenets Tjeneste, naar han endelig kunde trække sig
tilbage fra disse Kvaler og disse Kapløb om at faa fat i daarligt
betalte Fragter ...

Men for de to, der sidder derhjemme i det lille Hus med
de elfenbenshvide Gulve, de blanke Dørlaase og skinnende
Porcellainsvaser, staar han og »Neptun« endnu i hin Festdags Glans.

Naar Fatter engang lægger op, saa skal de jo leve af, hvad der
er tjent med »Neptun«; og Skuden, og hvad der kommer den ved, er
Samtaleemnet i de lange Vinteraftener, naar de efter Dagens Arbejde
sætte sig til Ro med Strikkestrømpen og Linnedsyningen.

Skønt det nu er to Aar siden, at de sidst var ombord, det var i
London, saa synes de dog, at de kender Skuden og dens skiftende
Mandskab rigtig godt, for Fatter er saa flink til at sende de
Amatørfotografier, som Agenterne paa Pladsen i Afrika tager.

Paa et af disse Billeder ser man under Solsejlet den høje, brede
Kaptajn i helt hvidt Tøj med broderede Morgensko paa Fødderne og
Kasketten skudt bag i Nakken. Omkring ham staa Folkene, Skibshunden,
hvis Tunge hænger den ud af Halsen, samt flere af de engelske
Herrer, som bo i Faktoriet. Det er slanke, smukke Mænd i flotte
Stanleydragter.

Og dog er det ikke paa dem, at Marie ser, naar hun -- hvad der kan
hænde, naar Moderen er ude -- tørrer sine Hænder og gaar fra sit
Formiddagsarbejde ind i Stuen, hvor der er saa pudset som ombord i en
Orlogsmand; hun tager Billedet i Kommodeskuffen og betragter det --
længe.

Nej, da ser hun paa en ung, barbenet Fyr med et lille Overskæg, som
er spiret frem, siden hun sidst var sammen med ham i London.

Alle de gode Minder der da komme op i hende! ... Saa morsomt og
hyggeligt de havde det sammen i de Dage, da Losningen var forbi,
og Indladningen endnu ikke var begyndt; de havde været sammen i
Vokskabinetter, i Theatret og inde i de store Kirker.

Hans var dog saadan noget helt andet end disse Urtekræmmersvende og
Handelskontorister, som satte alle deres Penge paa Klæder og var saa
vigtige og saa snakkesalige og dog ikke kendte noget til Verden uden
for denne lille By.

Se Hans, han har nu sparet op af sin Hyre og ligger i Kjøbenhavn og
læser til Styrmandseksamen. Det ved hun af Faderens Breve, i hvilke
han altid er rosende omtalt, om end Kaptajnen undertiden har hentydet
til manglende Sans for højere Interesser.

»Skidt med det«, farer det pludselig halvhøjt ud af Marie. Hun
mindes, hvor dejligt, hun syntes, det var, at Hans ikke talte og
forklarede, ligesom Faderen plejede, da de vare inde i den store
Kirke sammen, men bare gik stille ved Siden af hende og holdt hende
i Haanden, ligesaa højtidelig til Mode, som hun selv var ...

Han kunde dog for Resten gerne gøre en lille Afstikker over til dem,
inden han igjen rejste fra Landet ... ud i Verden, til store Byer
med megen Lystighed og til usunde Pladser i Syd-Amerika og Afrika.

       *       *       *       *       *

Og Hans kom en Søndag Morgen for at faa Hilsen med til Kaptajnen. Det
træffer sig nemlig saa heldigt, at han igen kan komme til at fare med
sin gamle Kaptajn.

Og den Dag var det med en egen husmoderlig, omhyggelig Følelse, at
Marie lavede Sødsuppen til og stegte Rødspætterne ... det var saa
morsomt at vide, at hun og Moderen ikke skulde sidde alene og spise
den gode Søndagsmad ...

Hans sukkede undertiden, som om han var bedrøvet over noget, og bedre
og finere Eksamen, end han mødte med, kunde der da ikke forlanges!
Saa var han saa tavs. Naa, han havde jo aldrig havt det meget med at
bralre op om al mulig Snak, tænkte Marie.

Hen paa Eftermiddagen sad de i Stuen alle tre. Hans, der havde slaaet
sig til Ro paa Puffen mellem Vinduerne, saa hele Tiden efter Marie,
der sad i Halvmørket inde i Stuen; men saa snart hun saa paa ham,
trak han Øjnene til sig. Derfor gav Marie sig til at kige ud paa
Gaden, for -- kunde det glæde ham at se paa hende -- saa maatte han
saamænd saa inderlig gerne.

Naar hun rakte efter noget, eller naar hun rejste sig og gik over
Gulvet, gjorde hun det uvilkaarligt langsommere og kønnere, end hun
plejede, naar hun til daglig havde travlt. Hun tænkte ikke videre
over det, -- men hun nænnede ikke andet for hans Skyld.

Frøknerne fra Byfogdens og Candidaten paa Kontoret spadserede forbi
og nikkede ind; og da Lampen derovre paa Lygtepælen var bleven
tændt og spejlede sig i Vandpytterne, gik Skomagerens Døtre til
Sangforeningsbal med opheftede Kjoler og hæklede Tørklæder over de
krøllede Frisurer.

Ovre i Genboens Villa sad Frøkenen ved Klaveret, og hendes Kæreste
stod ved Siden og spillede Violin. Skæret fra et Par smaa Lamper drev
mellem Palmer og Blomster i Karnappen ud paa den sølede Vej.

Der er kønt derovre, tænkte Marie, men her er ligesaa rart, naar her
saadan er en, som mener os det godt og er glad ved at være hos os,
som Hans er.

Men nu var der ikke længe til, han skulde af Sted; Moderen var i
Køkkenet for at lave en Kop Afskedskaffe. -- Det varede nok længe,
inden han igen kom til at sidde i en hyggelig Stue.

Marie fik pludselig en inderlig Lyst til at gaa hen og sætte sig ved
Siden af ham -- sidde ganske stille hos ham og holde ham i Haanden,
medens Tiden gik.

Saa var det jo, som de var for Alvor Kærester. Snak. -- Han vilde vel
ikke, han sagde jo ingen Ting. Men kunde det glæde ham, naar han laa
derude paa Søen og døjede ondt, at hun var hans Kæreste, saa bandt
hun sig gerne til ham, for hvad Hans vilde, det vilde hun ogsaa.

Men de kunde vel ogsaa godt være Venner, uden at der straks skulde
tænkes paa Forlovelse. Hun var vel ikke af dem, der absolut skulde
have en Kæreste. Det jagede jo ikke. -- --

Hans rejste sig. Han sagde Farvel et Par Gange til Marie. Da han
havde faaet Frakken knappet og var halvt ude af Døren, vendte han sig
til Madam Frederiksen og sagde:

»Ja, Kaptajnen har engang sagt noget til mig om, at han har lagt ud
for dem, at ... ja, at Mandfolk tidt er noget Rak, og ... at fine
Herrer ikke altid saadan er saa rigtig fine, naar det kommer til
Stykket ... og Marie er jo ... hun er jo kønnere end Folk er flest«.
-- Han hakkede i det, men sagde pludselig bestemt:

»Hun skal vel ikke tage Plads og rejse fra Madammen?«

»Jeg bliver hos Mor, saa længe Far er paa Søen!« siger Marie. »Skønt
jeg rigtignok helst vilde til et stort Hus og lære noget og se anden
Folkeskik«, føjer hun til.

»Til næste Aar skal vi besøge Fatter i London«, trøster Moderen og
giver Hans Pakken med Uldtøj og Strømper, som han skal have med til
Kaptajnen.

»Ja, og saa skal vi maaske med en Rejse. -- Mor skal skrives ind som
Kok!« udbryder Marie, pludselig leende.

Hans bliver højrød, siger igen Farvel, og denne Gang kommer han da
endelig af Sted.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Skonnertbriggen »Neptun« gaar igen fra England -- denne Gang med
Fragt til Brasilien ...

Kaptajn Frederiksen sidder efter endt Vagt i Kahytten. Han faar Piben
tændt, laver sig en Grog og slutter et Brev til den korresponderende
Rheder.

Dernæst begynder han at skrive til sin Kone og Datter.

Efter at have fortalt om Navigeringen i en Storm, som de nylig red
af, anbefaler han dem at takke »det store Ubekendte« for, at han
ogsaa denne Gang var lykkelig nok til at klare »Neptun« fra truende
Fare.

Han læser denne Sætning igennem engang til, for han véd godt, at hans
Kone ikke kan lide, at han ikke skriver »Vorherre i Himlen«.

Naa, det var ikke saadan at forklare sig for Kvinder, og paa dette
Punkt vilde han nu være sand og oprigtig.

Der var saamænd nok, han maatte skjule og lave om paa.

Nu har han imidlertid tabt Lysten til at skrive videre og lukker
Mappen for i Dag ...

Brevet ligger en Tid i hans Pult, til han tager det frem og igen
begynder at skrive.

                                Sydatlanterhavet den 12 Juli 1888.

    Min kære Kone og Datter.

 Som I seer af Overskriften ligger vi i Atlanterhavet endnu.
 Det er i Dag blikstille, Neptun ligger stille og avangserer
 ikke, snarere gaar det lidt tilbage endsom frem -- kedeligt
 -- ubehageligt, saa jeg jo ikke er i det bedste Humør. Saa var
 Stormene bedre skønt vi havde den ene værre endsom den anden,
 ret som om det var onde Furier som var sluppet løs imod mig og
 Neptun. Men blæse være med de Storme paa Havet, skønt det har
 gjort mig lidt ondt for Skuden, der har øvet sig i akrobatiske
 Kunster, snart stod hun paa Næsen og snart paa Spejlet, men de
 Storme har jeg været vant til at bekæmpe fra min Ungdom af, jeg
 regner dem for Legeværk mod dem, jeg har i Havn. Men nu ikke
 mere om det. En Nyhed har jeg at fortælle Eder. En mærkelig
 Adspredelse har jeg havt i Dag, og som jeg skal fortælle Eder
 om. Da jeg kom paa Dækket kredsede et halvt hundrede Alen fra os
 nogle Fugle, som lignede Maager, kuns var de saa meget større, 7
 Alen mellem Vingespidserne. Folkene havde i flere Timer skiftet
 til at have Udkigstørn efter dem, Fuglene holdt sig vedvarende
 til Luvart, og Gutternes Tænder løb mere og mere i Vand efter
 fersk Kød. Saa tog jeg mit Jagtgevær, gik i Jollen med Hans, han
 er paalidelig, den eneste Danske jeg har Ombord. De andre Fyre
 kunde maaske hitte paa Gavtyvestreger naar man var alene med dem
 i Jollen paa Verdenshavet. Man har jo ikke kunnet opdrage dem
 som Kæledægger. Det var forunderligt kan I tro. Et Stykke fra
 flød mit stolte Skib. Hans roede med smaa Tag for ikke at skræmme
 de kredsende Fugle; jeg tror ikke, han havde nogen Følelse af
 Øjeblikkets Storhed. Jeg skød 3. Det er min Mening, at Vingerne
 skal sendes til zoologisk Have.

 Folkene holde stort Festmaaltid.

 Jeg sidder alene i min Kahyt og skriver til Eder I to kære
 derhjemme i det lille dyrebare Danmark og tænker paa, hvor
 forunderligt det var -- i den skrøbelige Jolle paa det store
 Verdenshav -- for et Øjeblik ligesom sat helt udenfor det hele,
 alene med den Følelse -- -- -- --

Det var de sidste Ord, som Kaptajn Martin Frederiksen skrev til sin
Kone og Datter.

Et Telegram fra Rio meldte hans pludselige Død.

       *       *       *       *       *

Madam Frederiksen og Marie flyttede ind i Landet til en større By og
begyndte et Stryge- og Vaskeri.

Det kneb, særlig for Marie, at undvære »Stranden«.

Naar de Længsler kom op i hende, gik hun -- hvis der intet
presserende Arbejde var -- en Tur ned til Byens Havn, der ved en
Kanal stod i Forbindelse med Fjord og Hav.

Skibene og det muntre, travle Liv var der. Men den Rendesten var
dog ikke i Stand til at mætte Længslen efter den friske Søvind
og den videre Udsigt. Hun rystede saa irriteret Forknytheden af
sig, -- ingen Flæben, ingen Nykker; man skulde holde ud og ikke
give sig! Hun og Moderen kunde bedst klare sig med Enkekassens og
Skipperforeningens Tilskud her, -- altsaa blev de her!

Saadan raisonnerede Marie, vendte, gik forbi den lille, graa
Toldbygning og hjem; tog fat paa at hjælpe Moderen med Strygning
eller gav sig til at udfærdige Regninger til Kunderne.

-- Naar Dagens Arbejde var endt, gik Madam Frederiksen træt i Seng.
Marie blev gerne siddende lidt og døsede over Avisen.

Hvor det var trist altsammen.

Hvad brød hun sig om Ensomheden, da Faderen levede. Dengang havde
de saa meget at snakke om, saa mange Breve at tage frem, og Avisen
ventedes med spændt Interesse, -- der kunde jo være en eller anden
Efterretning, som kunde have noget at sige for »Neptuns« Kaptajn; og
alt, hvad de oplevede i deres daglige Liv, fik en særegen Betydning,
fordi der skulde skrives om det til Faderen. Dengang vidste de, at
naar Faderen kom hjem, eller de rejste for at møde ham, blev alt helt
anderledes.

Nu var der ikke andet at gøre end at hænge i fra Morgen til Aften.
Der var ingen afvekslende Hvile i Udsigt. Bedring i Kaarene var der
ikke Tale om; de maatte nok være glade til, saalænge det gik, som det
gik.

Marie havde havt Planer om at tage Plads; saa kunde Moderen fæste en
Jomfru til Hjælp, om det skulde behøves.

Men den Aften, hun begyndte at tale om det, gav Moderen sig til at
græde, ligesom naar de fordybede sig i Minderne, og hun lovede Marie,
at hun vilde besørge alt Sliddet, naar blot Marie vilde blive hos
hende og klare det med Regnskabet og Aftaler med Kunderne.

Marie gav intet bestemt Svar; hun syntes, det var hendes Pligt at
gøre sig haard og udføre den Plan, hun havde lagt. --

Da hun vaagnede næste Morgen, hørte hun, at Moderen arbejdede
forsigtigt ude i Køkkenet for ikke at vække hende. Marie saa paa
Uhret; det var en Time tidligere, end de ellers plejede at begynde
Dagens Arbejde.

Marie rejste sig for at staa op! Moderen kom ind med varm Kaffe og
sad paa Sengekanten hos hende, medens hun drak.

Marie forstod godt disse tavse Ømhedserklæringer; de gjorde hende
blød om Hjærtet, og af sig selv lovede hun at slaa Tankerne om at
tage Plads ud af Hovedet.

Hendes Moder behøvede hende dog. Det var der jo ellers ingen, der
gjorde.

Hans kunde jo saa udmærket undvære hende, selv om han havde skrevet
rigtig smukt efter Faderens Død, og selv om han havde forhørt sig
meget omstændeligt om deres Kaar.

Han laa mest derinde paa Varmen og sejlede; hjem kom han ikke --
Fritid undte han sig ikke, og nu siden hans Moders Død havde det vel
ikke saa meget at sige med en Maaneds Hyre og en Afmønstring; men
nej, saa snart han naaede England -- saa ud igen. Han kunde have
taget hende dengang, om han havde brudt sig om hende; det gjorde han
altsaa ikke, -- Sømænd var ikke saadan at stole paa, de saa' saa
mange og havde Tankerne saa mange Steder.

Naa, Kærestesorg for hans Skyld, det var der nu ikke Tale om; hun
kendte ham jo saa lidt, saa der var ikke noget for hende at sørge
over. -- En af Vaskeriets regelmæssigste Kunder var en Kommis
Lauritzen, der brugte meget Manchetlinned, og som altid selv kom og
betalte sin Regning.

Han gjorde stormende Kur til Marie og bød hende med i Theatret anden
Gang, han talte med hende.

Marie vilde ikke.

Hans Moder boede paa første Sal i Baghuset og havde Skole. Siden han
havde »opdaget« Marie, kom han hjem hver Aften paa en kort Visit og
kigede da altid ind til Frederiksens med det samme.

Madam Frederiksen, der var gæstfri, inviterede hans Moder over til
Aftenkaffe, men fik Afslag.

Lauritzen friede til Marie otte Dage efter, at han første Gang havde
set hende.

Marie blev ulykkelig, og Lauritzen ærgrede sig over sin ubehændige
Taktik og begreb ikke, at han, der kendte Kvindehjærtet og saa
udmærket havde Taget paa at appellere til dets yndige Svagheder, ikke
havde forstaaet, at her skulde han have holdt sig afventende en Tid
endnu.

Og Hr. Lauritzen beroligede Marie, erklærede, at det var hendes store
Dejlighed, der havde faaet ham til at overile sig til et Skridt, hvis
Vigtighed han fuldt vel anerkendte; men han var hendes oprigtigste
Ven og skulde aldrig, aldrig bede hende om mere end Venskab, før det
Momang kom, at hendes Hjærte flammede for ham.

Dette var Marie meget bekvemt; for vel kunde hun egentlig, naar hun
rigtig tænkte sig om, ikke lide Lauritzen, men han var dog altid lidt
Afveksling og paa en Maade ikke saa paatrængende som de andre Herrer,
der paa Gaden og i Vaskeriet søgte at gøre hendes Bekendtskab.

Nogen maatte hun da for Resten ogsaa have at tale med.

Lauritzen bad hende halvt spøgende om, at hun -- som Tegn paa, at hun
tillod ham venskabelige, broderlige Følelser, -- vilde gaa med ham i
Theatret næste Søndag. Hendes Moder skulde ogsaa med, tilføjede han,
da hun ikke straks svarede.

Igen Theatret! Det var saa fristende, for Marie elskede at gaa paa
Komedie, især naar de spillede rørende Stykker.

Hun svarede ikke helt afgjort nej, og Lauritzen erklærede, at næste
Søndag sendte han hende og Moderen Billetter, selv vilde han tillade
sig at sidde ved Siden af dem.

Søndag Formiddag var han inde for at aflevere Billetterne; han
snakkede vidt og bredt en Timestid om et Par formodede Skandaler og
om sig selv og sine Udsigter paa den forestaaende Session.

Hen paa Eftermiddagen kom en Hotelkarl med et Brev til Madam
Frederiksen. Hun fik Brillerne fat, og læste:

 »I Continuation af mit tiligere og af Dags Dato har jeg
 forglemt at erindre den tiligere Begyndelse af den paa Theatret
 stedfindende Forestilling, som undtagelsesvis er Kl. 7. Min
 ærbødigste Hilsen til Deres Frøken Datter. Deres med megen
 Agtelse F. L. M. Lauritzen.«

Madammen blev yderligere imponeret af ham. For Resten havde hun været
det straks, og hun skjulte det ikke, naar de talte om ham, der saadan
havde boret sig ind i deres daglige Færden og dermed i deres daglige
Tanker. -- --

Da det første rørende Stykke, hvor Marie kun havde Øje og Øre for
Scenen, var forbi, morede hun sig ikke rigtig. Der var saa meget
halvsjofelt i det andet Stykke, saa meget af det grimme fra Gaden;
-- desuden: hendes Kavallers Latter fulgte lige efter de vovede
Hentydninger, og det gjorde hende usikker og satte hende i daarligt
Humør.

Efter Forestillingen vilde hun helst have været hjem, men Lauritzen
vilde absolut have dem hen paa et Hotel for at drikke Kaffe, og Marie
maatte føje ham og Moderen.

Men hun var ikke vel til Mode. Hun saa godt, at et Par ældre, pæne
Kommisser, som Lauritzen paatrængende og flot hilste paa, knap
gad hilse igen. Og det generede hende meget, at han kommanderede
med Tjenerne, kasserede Kagerne og forlangte andre og henledte
Opmærksomheden paa sig ved støjende og familiært at hilse til højre
og venstre.

Da han gik hen til Buffetten, spærrede en Kammerat Vejen for ham ved
at strække et Ben ud; Lauritzen besvarede denne indirekte Spørgen:

»Gelinde, gelinde, jeg er diskræ!«

»Fanden tro Dig, din Bondedreng!«

De to Herrer lo raat. -- --

-- Marie laa længe vaagen den Nat.

Hun tænkte paa det første Stykke.

Aah ja ja. Hvis der blot i Virkeligheden var saadan en rar, dannet
Mand, som hun kunde gaa til, i hvis pæne Stue hun kunde sidde
hyggeligt og blive net behandlet, saa kunde hun fortælle ham, hvordan
det altsammen var og bede ham hjælpe med et godt Raad.

Naa, hvis der virkelig var saadan en, hvad vilde hun saa sige; hvad
bildte hun sig egentlig ind, der var i Vejen?

Marie smaagræd.

De havde det jo helt godt, og der var ikke noget bestemt, som var
kedeligt og trist, men Stuen var saa lille og beklumret, Gaden var
saa grim, alle Mennesker jagede af Sted og var utilfredse saa med
deres Stilling saa med hinanden. Og den evige Vasken og Strygen --
blot for at skaffe Mad i Munden og Tag over Hovedet, det var saa
ensformigt.

Hun var ikke doven; det var ikke det; men hun var da ung endnu og
længtes efter lidt udover det sædvanlige -- noget som Londonnerturene
eller Faderens Hjemkomst; -- bare ikke dette: op om Morgenen, Slid,
Mad, Slid, i Seng og saa det samme næste Dag igen.

Var det Fornøjelser hun trængte til? -- Saa kunde hun jo blot tage
mod Lauritzens Invitationer til Theater og Baller; -- -- naa ja, saa
kunde hun jo tage ud med ham; hun var jo da for Resten Kaptajnsdatter
og vidste nok, hvordan hun skulde gerere sig, saa at han ingen
Friheder tog sig. At han saa væmmelig ud tidt, naar han gloede
paa hende, det var Sludder af hende at tænke paa; Mandfolk var jo
nu Mandfolk. -- -- Men det var ikke væmmeligt, da Hans den sidste
Eftermiddag sad og saa paa hende.

Marie kunde ikke rede det ud fra hinanden, og hun følte sig angst og
hjælpeløs, som noget truede hende.

Madam Frederiksen snorkede.

Et Øjeblik var dette Legeme, der laa her i Sengen hos hende, Marie
imod. Naa, nu var hun da ved at blive baade ækel og skruptosset.

Det var nok Tid at tage Reb i Sejlene, ellers gik da al sund Fornuft
rabundus.

Og Marie tvang sig til at gennemgaa det første Stykke, Scene for
Scene; ingen Springen over, ingen Svinkeærinder, ingen unødvendig
Flæben over sig selv og Laven Grevindenykker; -- -- hun sov, før hun
naaede til Frierscenen. -- -- --

Naar Lauritzen ikke kom, spurgte Madammen efter ham.

»Du skulde ikke støde ham for Hovedet, Marie, Du fortryder det, naar
jeg er død, og Du sidder alene med Redeligheden.«

»Der er da andre til end ham.«

»Jamen Du vil jo ikke gøre noget for at faa Bekendtere.«

-- Madammen tilskyndede kun lempeligt, hun trængte ikke ind paa
Datteren, men Marie vidste saa inderlig vel, at naar hun gennem
Dampen fra Vaskekedlen saa Moderens Ansigt blive tankefuldt, da var
det Lauritzens fremtidige Boutik -- Duge og Lagen, Stole og Borde,
Køkkensager og Gardiner, der spillede glædeligt op i hendes Stump
Fantasi, medens Hænderne skrubbede op og ned ad Vaskebrædtet.

Ogsaa for Marie var der -- ved denne Indretten Hjem i Tankerne --
noget lokkende, som satte hendes Drømmeevne i en behagelig Svingning
og bar langt bort fra Vaskehusets klamme Dampe og vaade Stengulv. --

Det var heldigt for Lauritzen, at hun fik et Brev fra ham lige efter
saadan et stjaalent Strejftog i Fantasiens Rige.

Hun satte sig ind i Stuen og læste:

    Elskede Missemor.

 Situasionen er nu af den Beskaffenhed, at jeg i Henhold til mit
 tidligere udtalte og Hjærtes Kærlighed.

 Jeg kan sige, vær ej traurig i Sind og Skind, men lyt til mit Ord
 lad Lykken komme ind, hvis Du vil være min maa Du ikke gaa og
 spelle fin. Bliv min Kone, saa skal jeg sætte Dig paa en Throne.
 Ja nu frier jeg til Dig min elskede Pige. Jeg vil gerne have
 Dig saa snart som muligt, ved Din side kan jeg lægge mit flotte
 Ungkarleliv af. Og hør nu, har jeg digtet et Vers til Dig.

    Du har et Ansigt meget fint
    Du speller i Vaskeriet første Fiolin
    ligesom Stjerner er dine Øjne klare
    du er en første Klasses Vare.

    Hvor højt jeg end fløj Du naaede mig dog
    dine Øjne mig ej bedrog
    Du har rigtig kunnet mig forhekse
    vær ej mer af de strekse.

 Dette er skreven til din Ære min dyrebare Pige. Jeg maa medele
 Dig, at det har alletider været min Mening, at jeg vilde have en
 rigtig sød og flot Kone og kan jeg ingen bedre faa end Dig selv
 om Du ikke er øverst paa Rangstigen, hvad man jo ikke kan sige,
 er det min overbevisning. Om to Timer henter jeg dit Svar, naar
 vi har lukket, og skal Du da sidde paa mit Skød og skal det være
 mig en Fornøjelse at trykke det første Elskovskys paa din Mund.
 Var jeg ikke saa vis paa, at Du maatte elske mig, var jeg ikke
 saadan i kulør, som jeg er nu, jeg tænker paa, at Du nu skal
 blive min Kæreste rigtig med Ring. Nu glæder jeg mig til at se
 Dig alene og ser jeg helst, at Du sender din Moder i Byen at vi
 rigtig kan sitte i Sofaen alene som andre Kærestefolk. Og tegner
 jeg idet jeg er din, til Døden skilder os ad igen

                                               F. L. M. Lauritzen.

Uf, hvor kunde det Menneske dog ogsaa skabe sig og vrøvle. Marie
lagde Brevet sammen og glattede Folderne haardt. Hun skulde dog ikke
have noget af at være alene med _ham_.

Hun rejste sig for at kalde paa Moderen. -- Aah, hvor var her dog
grimt i Aften.

Paa Kommoden stod en Lampe uden Kuppel og oste lidt; der var koldt,
Gardiner var ikke rullet ned, og en vildfremmed Herre, der gik forbi,
nikkede ugenert ind til hende. Paa Sofa og Stole flød Dynger af
Fremmedes smudsige Tøj, som Marie skulde tælle. Døren ud til Gangen
var ikke rigtig lukket, og Støjen af et Skænderi lød helt ind til den
unge Pige.

Hun satte sig træt i Sofaen og lagde Hovedet ned paa sine Arme. Hvor
alt dette dog var forskelligt fra »Neptuns« Udfart, da Sommervinden
løftede Flag og Vimpler, og Festtalerne berømmede hendes Fader ...
Det var forbi for længe, længe siden ... men hvor havde hun tænkt og
tænkt paa den Dag og troet, at der vilde komme Dage, der var festlige
som den.

Men det var der altsaa ikke kommet. Hvorledes skulde det ogsaa gaa
til?

Marie løftede Hovedet og saa ud i Stuen.

Hun var vel gal, om hun kimsede ad Lauritzen; hun kom vel nok til at
holde af ham, hun havde jo ikke holdt af nogen anden -- det med Hans
var jo alligevel ikke andet end Indbildning.

Naar hun ikke var lykkelig ved at blive ved at gaa her i Sliddet uden
at opleve noget særlig kønt, saa maatte hun vel tage Lauritzen og
sige Tak til.

Og Moderen vilde blive glad ved det, og hun kunde saamænd nok trænge
til en rigtig Hjærtensglæde engang igen.

Hurtigt -- for ikke at vige tilbage fra dette, der vilde give
Forandring og forskaane for Moderens svage Tilskyndelser og hans
paatrængende Plagerier, gik hun ud i Køkkenet.

»Lauritzen vil forloves med mig, Mor.«

»Jahne dog! Hvad er det Du siger!«

Madammen saa ængstelig paa hende. »Du tager ham vel, Marie?«

»Det gør jeg vel Mor, -- -- saa kan jeg maaske gøre det lidt bedre
for Dig, saadan Du altid slider.«

»Herregu' lille Marie, det er jo nu det, som passer for mig. Men Du
skulde jo da have det lidt finere. Og saa kan jeg da rolig lukke
mine Øjne, naar Du er forsørget. -- Hvis nu Fatter havde levet,
Herregu'.«

Men der blev ikke Tid til Rørelse. Tøjet skulde ryddes til Side,
Stuen opvarmes, og andre Forberedelser gøres. --

Lauritzen stillede Klokken ni med en Azalia i silkepapirspyntet
Potte, den holdt sig bedre end en Buket, som jo egentlig hørte til
ved en saadan Lejlighed.

Moderen blev lidt ude i Køkkenet, og Lauritzen begyndte uforstyrret
et langt mundtligt Frieri. Marie tabte hurtig Traaden, for hun havde
grebet den Sætning, at det ligefrem var hendes _Pligt_ at forlove sig
med ham, da hun havde Magt til at frelse ham fra daarligt Levned.
Det forekom hende saa uendelig latterligt, at det skulde tages saa
alvorligt med saadan en forbumlet, rødøjet Handelsbetjent; -- hun
havde den Pligt at gifte sig med ham, for at han skulde holde op
at svire, sagde han; det var jo ogsaa nemmere end at gøre sig den
Ulejlighed selv at sige stop! Hvor var det i Grunden grinagtigt --
skønt det gjaldt hele hendes Fremtid; -- hun smilede, Smilet blev
til Latter; med Vilje blev hun ved at le, -- det nyttede jo ikke at
græde, man skulde jo gaa paa Jorden, selv om den var gloende, og
_hun_ var vel ikke mere højfornem og sippet end andre Piger.

For Resten fik hun sig vel nok en meget rar Mand, han saa jo da til
sin Moder hver Aften.

Madammen kom ind. Lauritzen, der just ikke fandt Maries Latter
afvisende, selv om den forekom ham mindre romantisk i et saadan
Øjeblik, begyndte at kysse Marie med en Ugenerthed, som om de havde
været forlovet i Aarevis.

Hun stødte ham vredt fra sig.

»Ja, Lauritzen, hun har jo ikke været forlovet før,« jævnede Madammen.

»Er med paa Noderne, Svigermama! En sart _Kvinde_. _Gelinde_.
Forstaar!« -- Lauritzen udviklede sin Menneskekundskab ved Hjælp af
alle de Føljetoner, han kunde faa fat i.

Aftenen sneg sig langsomt hen for Marie.

Lauritzen var overbærende med hendes Koldsindighed, som han egentlig
fandt ganske fornem, og han prædikede med al sin Tungefærdighed
og Selvsikkerhed om det tilkommende Hjem og sin egen fremtidige
Stilling. --

Da han skulde til at gaa, og Marie pligtopfyldende, men koldt, tog
mod hans Kys, sagde han ærgelig:

»Du skal værsgo' at tage Dig i Situationen, Marie, og være min
Kæreste rigtig.«

Marie følte det som en Lettelse, da hun drejede Nøglen om i Døren
efter ham.

Naa, hun vænnede sig vel til det Slikkeri. Nu var hun jo bunden til
ham, og han blev vel nok god imod hende, naar han syntes, hun var saa
dejlig, som han sagde.

Men Højtid og Glæde, det var der ikke over hende, som hun gik der
og ryddede til Side og af og til talte ind til Moderen, som træt
skyndte sig i Seng.

Marie skyndte sig ogsaa og lagde sig snart i Dobbeltsengen ved Siden
af Moderen.

De laa lidt stille i Mørket.

Derpaa sagde Moderen:

»Herregu' lille Marie, saa skal vi skilles.«

»Han skal da have Forretning først.«

»Det bliver da før eller senere. Saa bliver her stille.«

»Du skal bo i Nærheden af os Moder; saa kan vi gaa sammen, og Du
bliver ikke helt alene.«

»Om Natten bliver jeg da. Du kan ellers tro, jeg har tidt havt Plasér
af at ligge og lytte til, hvor Du dog kunde trække Vejret dybt, naar
Du sov.«

Det, som hele Aftenen stille havde gnavet i Maries Sind, fik nu Magt,
og hun brast i Graad.

»Saa saa lille Marie. Saa saa. Græd dog ikke saadan; det javer helt
igennem mig at høre det. Du kan jo gøre det om, hvis det skal være.
Du skal jo da ikke giftes lige med det samme. Og han siger, at han
skal være saa mageløs mod Dig. Du skal bare ikke spekulere. Put Du
Dig nu godt ned og læs din Aftenbøn, saa linder det.« -- --

Næste Formiddag laa der et Brev til Marie i det aabne Køkkenvindue.
-- Marie læste det; det var Skolebestyrerinden i Baghuset, Lauritzens
Moder, der henvendte sig til Frederiksens med Bøn om et Laan paa 15
Kr. til Hjælp til Husleje; hun havde betænkt sig længe, men vidste
ikke andet Raad, og nu da hun af Rullekonen havde hørt, at Ferdinand
havde kysset Marie ude i Gangen, og de sagtens var forlovede, mente
hun, at hun i sin Nød turde henvende sig til dem. Det var jo kun et
Laan. --

Hvad var nu dette?

Uden at sige noget til Moderen tog Marie sin Sparekassebog og gik hen
og hævede Pengene.

Om Eftermiddagen gik hun over til Baghuset.

Ad en smudsig, stejl Trappe kom hun til en Dør, hvor der hængte en
Tavle med Svamp og Griffel lige under Navnepladen. --

                          DOROTHEA LAURITZEN
                          Skolebestyrerinde

læste Marie og bankede flere Gange paa. Da ingen svarede, gik hun ind
i Stuen.

Der syntes at være gjort ihærdige Forsøg paa at dække, at alt var
i Forfald. Gulvbrædderne var slidte og graa; et af dem vippede, da
Marie traadte paa det, og der laa mange smaa og uens Tæppelapper.
Stoppede Gardiner hang for de lave Vinduer, hvor den blaahvide Maling
paa mange Steder var skallet af Træet. Om Bordet stod forskellige
Slags Stole. Hæklede hvide Stykker dækkede over det ituslidte
Betræk. Langs den ene Væg hældede under en Del blegnede Fotografier
et taffelformet Klaver; Pedalen var brudt af, og Laaget havde en
Revne. Paa en Konsol stod mange Billeder af Hr. F. L. M. Lauritzen i
forskellige Stillinger. Det dunkle Spejl over dem gengav udvisket et
Hjørne af det triste Interiør.

Marie stod lidt.

Saa kom Fru Lauritzen ind. Hun var graa og mager; over Øjnene
hvælvede Pandebenet sig kantet og skarpt, Munden faldt ind om nogle
grimme Tandstumper. Hendes Væsen var nervøst og uroligt.

Marie sagde:

»Det var om Brevet.«

Skolebestyrerinden tav afventende. Marie fortsatte:

»Moder kunde jo komme til at trænge, hvis vi blev syge eller saadan.
Jeg mener, De kan jo blot sige det til Deres Søn.«

»Min Søn! -- Det er ikke saa let at bede sine egne, skal jeg sige
Dem, Frøken. Desuden, han har frabedt sig, at jeg beder ham om mere
end de 5 Kroner, han giver mig hver Termin. Og han kunde jo blive
vred og tage dem fra mig ogsaa. Det er jo kun et Laan, De kan være
saa sikker paa, at De faar dem igen. Alle Børnene har endnu ikke
betalt Brændepengene.«

»Ja, værsgo, her er Pengene.«,

Skolebestyrerindens Haand, der nervøst havde glattet frem og tilbage
paa Bordkanten, blev stille.

»Tak. Men De skal nok faa dem igen. Det kan De være vis paa.«

Hendes Ydre gik Marie til Hjærte; hun vilde gerne vise lidt
Venlighed, men den anden stod og tav saa tillukket; Marie brød Pavsen
ved at spørge:

»Hvor har De Skolestuerne?«

»Den er her; saa har jeg nogle Bænke om Bordet; jeg rydder dem ud til
om Eftermiddagen, for jeg vil jo gerne have det lidt pænt.«

»Hvor mange Elever har De?«

»Ja, nu er et Par bleven konfirmerede. Jeg havde ellers atten.«

»Hvor meget faar De saa i Skolepenge?«

»Ja, -- det er forskelligt; de større giver da som oftest 1 Krone 75.«

»Om Maaneden?«

»Ja; det er jo ikke meget, -- men naar jeg endda blot fik nye
ind. Men det er ikke saadan. Jeg kan jo da nok naa at sy lidt for
Forretninger om Eftermiddagen. Men« -- det kom næsten ufrivilligt --
»sommetider har jeg alligevel knap Brød i Huset!«

»Men sig det dog til Deres Søn. Vi maa tale med ham om det!«

»Det maa De ikke! Og De vil endelig nok være saa god ikke at sige om
Laanet. Han bliver saa vred og kunde let tage de 5 Kroner fra mig ved
Terminen. Men hvad skulde jeg gøre?«

»De kan tro, naar han rigtig ved, hvordan det er, vil han nok ordne
det noget bedre for Dem. Han faar jo god Løn og --«

»Han bruger ogsaa meget til sine fine Klæder! Ja, han maa jo nu ogsaa
være pænt klædt i Forretningen, det maa han jo. Og engang maa det
vel blive til noget, at han gør Alvor af at faa lidt lært; ellers
kommer de jo ingen Vegne rigtig nu til Dags. Men _jeg_ kan ikke give
mere til ham, jeg har saamænd gjort, hvad jeg kunde, da han lærte og
saadan. -- Men saa mange Tak for Laanet; De skal faa dem igen, men De
maa endelig ikke sige noget til Ferdinand og heller ikke, at jeg véd,
De er forlovede, for han bliver saa vred, naar jeg blander mig i hans
-- som med den forrige Forlovede. Han fortæller mig det nok.« --

Med tungt Hjærte gik Marie ned ad Trappen.

Hvad vilde Hans, som havde været saa god ved sin Moder, sige, hvis
han vidste, _hun_ havde saadan en Kæreste.

I en dump, trist Stemning kom hun ind og gav sig straks til at
arbejde med Regnskabet; alt det, som havde paavirket hende til at
tage Lauritzen, laa som Taager over hendes Beslutsomhed.

En Buket, som Lauritzen sendte, lod hun ligge uden at sætte den i
Vand.

Moderen stod med den ude i Køkkenet, da Lauritzen, uden at banke paa,
overraskede Marie i Stuen.

Han trak hende ned paa sit Skød og kærtegnede hende paa en temmelig
nærgaaende Maade.

Marie rev sit Hoved fra hans kognaksduftende Mund og gav ham en
smeldende Lussing.

»Marie! Er Du tosset?«

»Jeg er til Sinds at give Dem en til. Det kunde maaske lette, for jeg
er saa lynende gal i Hovedet paa Dem og paa mig selv, som har været
ussel nok til at betro mig til saadan en Herre som Dem. Vi passer
ikke sammen. Nu ved jeg det. De maa undskylde, jeg ikke fik det sagt
i Aftes. Nu er det bedst, De gaar.«

»Men Tøs dog, hvad Fanden stikker der Dig!«

»Værsgo'. Skæld bare ud. Det er ikke mer, end jeg har fortjent, naar
jeg forlover mig med én, jeg ikke rigtig har kær af Hjærtet. Gaa nu!
-- De maa ikke være vred. Men jeg kan ikke lide Dem. Det ved jeg nu.
Dem! Og Deres »Redden« og Deres kunstige Breve. -- Men kan De da nu
ikke gaa, Menneske!«

»Hæ, Du er sgu godt tovli'. Men jeg er for Resten ligeglad. Bild Dem
bare ikke ind, jeg bliver ved at gaa og sukke for Dem.«

Han satte Hatten paa. Saa stod han lidt og blev rørt.

»Farvel Frøken Frederiksen. Gud, hvor er De dejlig. -- De kunde gerne
give mig et Søsterkys til Afsked!«

»Gaa nu!«

»Naa, naa lille Missemor; ikke saa stor; det var da ikke første
Gang.« Han slog Armen om hende. Marie tog ham i Skulderen, slængte
ham væk og gik sin Vej.

Lauritzen stod lidt.

»Satans ogsaa. Satans ogsaa. Saadan en dejlig Pige.«

Han tog Hatten af og strøg den blank med Ærmet.

»Naa nu nix verknoten Ferdinand Lauritzen. Du gi'r hende Fanden gør
Du -- den Vasketøs!«

Lauritzen saa sig i Spejlet, trak sit Slips til rette, satte Hatten
flot paa og gik. -- -- --

Efter den Tid holdt Marie sig helst hjemme. Hun var bleven sky for
at komme i Lag med Fremmede. Af og til sendte hun Middagsmad over
til Skolebestyrerinden i Baghuset. Denne takkede pr. Bud, men undgik
Marie, da Laanet endnu ikke var tilbagebetalt.

Det var blevet Maries Livsvisdom, at skulde man gifte sig, skulde man
holde af, saa der var Forslag i det, ellers maatte man helst blæse
alt Kæresteri en lang Marsch og finde sig til Rette i sine Kaar uden
alt for mange Spekulationer; og da hun betragtede det som givet, at
hun ikke kom til at bryde sig noget om Bylapsene, saa behandlede
hun de Herrer, som hun traf i Vaskeriet eller hos Naboens, med en
munter Ro, som virkede afkølende. I Almindelighed troede man hende
forskanset bag en hemmelig Forlovelse.

Naboerne søgte hende meget; hun rakte gerne en hjælpende Haand og var
ikke bange for at sige sin Mening, naar det gjaldt om et godt Raad.
Navnlig tog hun sig af et Pigebarn paa femten Aar, som hun lærte op
til Vask og Strygning og anden huslig Dygtighed, og hvis Tendens til
»Renderi« hun søgte at dæmpe.

Madam Frederiksen sagde rigtignok om Pigebarnet og hendes Søstre:

»De vil til den Side, Marie, og saa kan ti Par Vognmandsheste ikke
slæbe dem til den anden.«

»Det kan da ikke nytte at opgive det ligestraks. De to ældre ... naa
ja, for min Skyld ingen Allarm, naar bare Katinka bliver en ordentlig
Pige; det har jeg nu sat mig i Hovedet, jeg gerne vil have. Hun kan
blive Jomfru hos Konsulinden hjemme; der faar hun det som Blommen i
et Æg, og saa gaar hun da ikke i Hundene som Høkerens Carla.« --

Da Katinka var atten Aar, meldte hendes Moder en Dag Marie, at nu var
det galt fat med Pigebarnet.

Moderen sagde med forarget Mine:

»Jeg gjorde mig jo gal, da jeg saa', hvad der var i Vejen. Men saa
fik jeg jo at vide, at der ikke var noget for Tøsen at stille op;
Kæresten task hende jo, det Bæst.«

Marie tog sig det meget nær og havde en Følelse af Skam, -- havde hun
ikke engang kunnet gøre saadan et stakkels Pigebarn begribeligt, at
hun bare kom ned i Skidtet paa den Maner. --

Hun arbejdede haardt Dagen igennem, men havde dog en ubehagelig
Følelse af, at der var mere endnu, hun burde udrette.

Hvad havde det saa nyttet, da hun søgte at stive en anden af! Katinka
var dog nu alligevel kommen ind i Hvirvlen; nu rendte hun med
Alverdens Mandfolk og saa farlig ud.

Det var dog bedst at leve rolig og tro Menneskene gode og skikkelige,
passe sit Arbejde og af og til at gaa i Theatret og se noget rigtig
kønt. -- Naar Bifaldet rungede op mod Skuespillerne, naar hun paa
Byens Musæum saa Malerier, eller naar hun i Avisen læste om et eller
andet dygtigt Foretagende, var det, som om en Slags piblende, stolt
Glæde gjorde hende varm: der var dog altsaa alligevel nogen, der
kunde udrette noget, overvinde Modstand og naa Maalet, saaledes
som de havde talt og sunget den Dag, da alt samlede sig om at gøre
»Neptuns« Udfart dejlig og uforglemmelig. --

Hun havde faaet indført, at de i Mørkningen hvilede sig et Kvarters
Tid.

Da saa hun helst, at ingen Fremmede forstyrrede dem.

Moderen halvsov i Sofahjørnet. Marie sad tavs med Hænderne foldede
under Nakken, Benene strakt ud og hele det trediveaarige stærke,
kønne Legeme mageligt hvilende, medens Tankerne fløj rundt, eller en
Drøm fangede hende.

Hun var igen kommen til ofte at tænke paa hin Solskinsdag, som bragte
saa mangfoldige og saa festlige Skønheder over det hvide Skib, der
droges langsomt gennem de klukkende, friske Smaabølger.

Med rigtig sikker Glæde mindedes hun ikke al den Festen; der var
som noget uholdbart ved al den Fornøjelse og Stads, selv om det
alligevel var dejligt at se for sig: Søen, Solskinnet, Baadene, hvor
fremmede Mennesker svingede med Hattene, og alle Havnens Skibe, der
var flagsmykkede fra Vandgangen til Flagknappen.

Pludselig kunde hele det flagrende Indtryk af leende, oprømte
Mennesker, smeldende Flag og Søens og Himlens straalende Farver
vige tilbage for et fast Billede: en ung bedrøvet Sømand, der sagde
Farvel til sin Moder. Det gjorde godt at genkalde sig det, -- der var
noget virkeligt og tilforladeligt i det, noget, som ikke helt kunde
forsvinde og blive til ingen Ting.

Mon Hans aldrig tænkte paa den Dag? Hvor mon han var henne i Verden?

       *       *       *       *       *

En Januardag var det efter flere Dages stærkt Snefald begyndt at tø.

Sneen, der var falden saa munter og let, laa nu tung og halvsmudsig;
de vaade Brosten var begyndt at vise sig, Spadseregangenes Træer var
næsten sorte af klam Væde, og Skyerne drev lavt.

Det var Søndag, saa der var ikke mange Folk nede ved Havnen,
hvor Marie langsomt kom gaaende mellem store Stenbunker og mørke
Tømmerstabler.

Yderst ved det store, røde Pakhus laa »Neptun«, hjemkaldt fra England
for at komme under Reparation.

Hans, der endnu var Styrmand ombord, havde fra London skrevet, at
de Portrætter, som de jo nok vidste, at han havde i sin Varetægt
og efter Kaptajnens Ordre kun maatte aflevere personligt, nu snart
skulde komme dem i Hænde.

Det var dem Marie vilde ned at hente.

Hans havde skrevet to Gange, og hun havde svaret; det var falden
hende saa let at fylde Papirets fire Sider, for hun vidste, at hun
gjorde ham godt ved at fortælle om deres Hjem, og hvad der ellers
angik dem. Ogsaa at hun af en Fejltagelse havde været forlovet i 24
Timer. Der var noget af en Bods smertelige Sødme i at bekende dette
for Hans, og det var aabent Spil, han skulde ikke komme hjem og tro,
at hun havde siddet og ventet paa, at han skulde komme og forlove
sig med hende. Hun var ikke af dem, der ikke kunde kende lidt til et
Mandfolk uden straks at tænke sig Forlovelse og den Slags. --

Det skulde blive sært at se »Neptun«, hvor Fader var død, og
underligt at tale med Hans, som havde kendt hende dengang, da hun
endnu ikke vidste, hvad Livet gav.

Saa tog hun et forsvarligt Tag i sine egne Tanker. Hun havde at være
rolig og ikke at faa alt for mange Fornemmelser. Den Ro, som hun
havde væbnet sig med hjemmefra, vilde hun ikke miste.

Men da hun staar her og ser ud i den snevre Kanal, hvor graa Isflager
grøde sig sammen, mindes hun igen hin Udfartsdag, og hun hører
Flagene smelde og ser den unge Sømands taarefyldte, trofaste Øjne.

Og da føler hun med urolig Sorg, at naar hun nu skal se Hans som en
Fremmed og for sidste Gang have noget med Skuden at gøre, saa vil det
være, som det jævnt kedsommelige skrider ned og begraver den lønlige
Sti, der har ført til en aldrig helt glemt Drøm om Kærlighed og Lykke.

For Mindet om Hans, ung og betaget af en ren Sorg, der hævede ham
over Omgivelsernes jævne Lystighed, og Mindet om Skibet, der i
Festdragt, med Forventningens Glans over sig styrede gennem de
solbeskinnede Bølger, -- er dog det, der har vakt det blødeste,
kønneste og det mærkeligste i hendes Sind. -- Sæt, det var en
Ondskab, en grim Handling, der havde været hendes Ungdoms første
stærke Indtryk!

Hun var reven ud af sin sædvanlige Ro, og stærkt og bittert tænkte
hun: »Jeg glemmer Herligheden med »Neptun«, men jeg finder mig ikke
i at glemme Hans, og jeg kan ikke lade være at holde af ham, selv om
han aldrig skal faa det at vide!«

Taarerne begyndte at trænge sig frem, -- hendes Hjærte var saa fuldt
og saa bevæget.

Da samlede hun resolut den sorte Kjole, løftede den omhyggeligt og
gik raskt hen mod Skibet: ingen Scener, ingen Flæben for Folks Øjne!

Det havde Fader ogsaa sagt hin Festdag, da »Neptun«, pudset og
hvidmalet, gled som en stolt Svane ud mellem de grønne Øer.

Der laa Skuden.

Nu var den sortmalet; det rustne Anker var halet op og havde skrabet
den udenbords og afsat røde Streger.

Ved Rælingen stod Mægleren og Kaptajnen, der havde lodden Hue ned
over Ørene og i Munden en kort Pibe, som han gumlede hen i den ene
Mundvig, da han sagde:

»Ja, naar de kommer lidt nærmere Solen og faar mere Tørring, skal hun
ha' en Omgang Pensel; hun er svært forkrabbet.«

Det var rigtignok sandt!

Hvor saa' dog Skibet ud!

Marie gik videre langs Bolværket for at se paa Navnepladen agter.

Standsede pludselig. Hendes Øjne fyldtes af Taarer, og Hjærtet
begyndte at banke.

Oppe ved Rattet stod Hans Holgersen med Tømmermanden, der klarede
Flagstangen, som var knækket i en Storm i Nordsøen.

Tømmermanden lagde Værktøjet og gik ned mod Malerrummet ...

Og Hans, der stod med Ryggen til, vendte sig og gav sig sindigt til
at hejse Flaget.

Dette Billede sænkede sig vældigt og egenraadigt ned i Marie og
mødtes med det Minde, som havde gnavet og pint i stormfulde Nætter,
og naar tjenstagtige Venner havde refereret Rhedernes uvenlige
Bemærkninger om hendes Fader, -- Mindet om, da Flagstangen knækkede,
da han vilde svare de Hilsende i Land.

Men Uhyggen ved det Varsel svandt hen, da hun saa Hans, der støt
og rolig stod der og gjorde Flaglinen fast; Hans, som havde fulgt
»Neptun« saa trofast i alle disse Aar. Og som ikke betragtede hende
som en Fremmed, der var ham og Skibet uvedkommende. Det forstod hun
med stille, lykkelig Jubel, da han opdagede hende og hilste hende.

I den milde, stærke Stemning -- lige vidt fra hin Dags festlige Lys
og fra dennes klamme, skjulende Taage -- fulgte hun med ham ned i
hans Lukaf.

Idet han aabnede Kisten for at fremtage Portrætterne, saa' hun, at
hendes Billede var opklæbet indvendig i Laaget.

Da han mærkede, at hun havde set det, rejste han sig og tog om hendes
Hænder.

De var begge af samme Højde, stod og saa' hinanden fast ind i Øjnene.

Naar Hans paa de ensomme Vagter eller paa slentrende Vandringer i
store fremmede Byer havde tænkt paa Fremtiden, saa var Marie det
Kærnepunkt, hvorom hans Lykketrang dannede en lysende Taage af
Haab og Ønsker. Saa sikkert som noget var hun med, hvergang han
spekulerede over noget særligt, -- -- -- dengang, da han sparede for
at tage Eksamen, og ved Sømandspræstens Juletræ i Hull, da det traf
sig, at han fik et Halstørklæde med Juleønsker fra En hjemme i Byen;
og da han laa paa Hospitalet i New York, efterat han var forlist og
havde mistet alt; og Natten efter den Sommerdag ovre under England,
da hun pludselig røg ud i en Nordvest, og Jungmanden gik over Bord
og druknede lige for Øjnene af ham; -- -- altid var Marie med i hans
Tanker. Hun var jo ogsaa for ham bestandig omgiven af det Mod og det
Haab, som havde været over det hele hin Sommerdag i Sundet. Hvor
akavet det end var gaaet for »Neptun«, saa havde den Skude dog siden
den Dag noget mere over sig end andre Fartøjer, og hvad han saa end
skulde faa at kæmpe med, saa skulde hendes Kærlighed hjælpe ham at
klare det strængeste. --

Han vilde sige hende noget om dette; men en pludselig Jublen over
endelig at skulle dele dette stærke, forhaabningsfulde med hende
fyldte ham med en uvant, forvirrende Magt, der dirrede helt ud i hans
forslidte Hænder, saa at hun uvilkaarlig tog med øm Fasthed om dem.

Han var ikke vant til at forme sine Tanker i Ord, da han ingen havde
havt at skrive til, siden hans Moder døde, og ikke havde læst stort
andet ude i Søen, end hvad han havde Brug for til Eksamen.

Det faldt da saa helt anderledes, end han havde tænkt det.

Men Lykken over ømme Længsler og stærke Følelser, som ikke skyggedes
af nogen Tvivl eller Usikkerhed, Lykken over det nye, mærkelige,
straalende, der foldede sig ud i hendes Sind, da hun saa ham ved
Flaget agter, bringer hende til at fornemme den Glans og Varme,
som er skjult i hans jævne Ord om, at han har Udsigt til at blive
»Neptuns« Fører, da Kaptajnen lægger op efter denne Rejse, og at han
saa kan gifte sig, men at han ikke vil have nogen anden Pige i hele
Verden end hende. --

Da Marie sad hos sin Ven i den snevre, fattige Kahyt, tænkte hun,
greben ind til Roden af sit Væsen, at det var en _Styrelse_, at
Lauritzen havde listet sig saa lumskt ind den Aften, saa at hun var
bleven saa forfærdelig vred og lige med et havde givet ham Afsked;
sæt, hun var gleden dybere ind i det; ja, saa havde hun aldrig
oplevet en Stund som denne sammen med ham, der nu sad og holdt saa
trofast om hende og hviskede om Fremtiden og om den Dag for længe
siden; den Dag, da hendes Sjæl havde optaget et Billede, der -- disse
Aar igennem -- havde været som en Ankergrund, der var Skyld i, at
hendes Tro paa ham og Mindet om ham aldrig helt var skyllet bort fra
hende.




TO SØSTRE.


I den blaa Sommerluft rejste der sig et Sted i Norden en stærk Borg.

Men Borgens Frue havde ikke Sans for Portenes sikre Nagler eller for
Taarne og Tinders stolte Rejsning. For hende var der kun ét: det
Barn, hun havde født Maanedsdagen efter sin Husbonds Død.

Hun tilbragte sine Dage ved Barnets Vugge og mangen Nat lyttende
betaget til dets sagte Aandedrag.

Fra Taarnet vajede intet Banner; i Staldene stod Hestene urørte, i
Skovene drev Dyrene om uden at jages, og de af Svendene, som endnu
var unge, forlod hendes Tjeneste, fordi de hellere vilde binde
Harnisk paa og slaaes af al Magt paa de vide Heder med vrede Fjender
end gaa her i Tryghed og blive gamle og graa bag den Grænse, hun drog
mellem Verden og sig selv og sit. -- --

Der flyver Fugle, der vælder Roser. --

En silde stormfuld Aften kommer en Svend ind med en Byldt, som
han har fundet i den dybe Skygge ved Porttaarnets Mur. Kaaber
og Silkeklæder vikles bort; et Par mørke Barneøjne stirrer mod
Lysskærets Leg paa de blanke Ildbukke ved Ovnen; de se op i
Røgfangets Mørke, og i Blikket dukker en Skygge af Ængstelse frem;
men den svinder, da det fæster sig ved Borgfruens Ansigt.

Da aabnes den sørgmodige Frues Hjærte for det lille, hjælpeløse
Hittebarn, og hun løfter det i sine Arme og tager det til sit Barns
Søster.

       *       *       *       *       *

Og Inger, det var Datteren, og Germa ... det Navn havde man fundet i
en Guldring, der hang om Hittebarnets Hals ... voksede op i Kærlighed
og Ømhed. --

En Solskinsdag stod Moderen i et Vindue og saa ned i Borggaarden,
hvor de to Børn kom gaaende.

Inger gik ens og langsomt. Hun var højere end Germa og havde lagt sin
Arm om hendes Skulder; det jævnede den andens urolige Gang.

Men længe gik de ikke saadan.

Germa sprang af Sted; .. snart jagede hun Duernes Flok i Vejret,
saa de mange flagrende Vingepar lyste i Formiddagssolskinnet; snart
borede hun sine brune Hænder ind i de vilde Rosers Hæk for at faa den
rødeste Rose til Ingers lyse Haar; saa gled hun atter ind i Søsterens
Arm, og de fortsatte deres Vej ... bort under den lave Porthvælving.

Og lidt efter brødes Stilheden af Germas muntre, klare Stemme, der
raabte den kraftige Hilsen, som hun kendte fra Viserne, op til
Porttaarnet, hvor Kurens Plads i Aarevis havde været tom.

Borgfruen vendte sig med et Suk.

Skæbnen raader underligt!

Hun havde sørget og grædt saa saare. Men som Aarene randt hen,
stængte hun med Ensformighed og Stilhed for alt Begær efter Liv og
brusende Lykke.

Og hun gemte Børnene med sig i Flugt for alle groende Haab, fordi hun
vidste, det kunde ske, at Haab blev til Sorg.

Men nu, da Vingerne voksede sig stærke paa den fremmede Fugl, hun
havde lunet i sin ensomme Rede, -- og den flagrede ud, og den kom
hjem og bragte Bud til hendes vintertavse Sjæl om smeltende Sne og om
Muld, der var rede til Frøkornet, -- da veg Glemselen og Stilheden af
hendes Sind, og den meldte sig igen, den gamle Sorg over hendes døde
Herre. -- --

Germa færdedes vaagen og varmblodig vidt ud fra den snevre Stue.
Der var i hendes Spor en Strøm af Liv og Uro og bag alle hendes
Spørgsmaal en kraftfuld Higen efter Viden om Tilværelsen i al dens
Bredde og Dybde. Hun værnede med Ømhed og Undren hver Plantespire,
der blev til af et ringe Frø, og hun lo af Glæde ved at fornemme sin
Hests spændte Styrke, naar hun jog hen ad Markerne. Hun kunde blive
stille af Lykke over Moderens og Søsterens Kærlighed; og naar der
berettedes om Fædrenes daadrige Levned, _lyttede_ ingen som hun --
saa favnende det alt, tagende og ejende det.

Den gamle Krønikebog og de to Helgenlegender, med Riddervaabnet i
Guld paa mørke Læderbind, og de kostelige haandskrevne Dokumenter
blev slæbt ned fra Hylden; naar da Germa stod paa den høje Stige og
søgte paa det fredede Sted, hvor de gemtes, saa blussende ivrig,
at Støvet dansede i Solstriben, da var det noget andet og noget
smerteligere end Angst for, at den lille, faste Haand skulde slippe
sit Tag i den Egetræeskorsblomst deroppe, som gennemfor Borgfruen paa
en saa urolig Maade.

       *       *       *       *       *

Borgfruens hvide Hænder, der i mange Timer taalmodigt havde syet
Roser paa Silkens lyse, bløde Flager, lagde sig til Hvile i hendes
Skød.

Fra de store Loftsbjælker og fra det mørke Egepanels kunstfærdige
Udskæringer rykkede Tusmørket nærmere og nærmere ind paa hende.

Hun rejste sig, gik hen og skød Vinduet op, satte sig paa Vægbænken
i Vinduesfordybningen med Haand under Kind og stirrede ud i Luften,
medens Mynden, der laa ved hendes Fødder, aandede lydløst i rolig
Søvn.

Længe var der stille.

Saa bevægede den brede Dør sig paa sine store Hængsler for Ingers
spinkle Haand.

Mynden rejste sig, gabede lydeligt og strakte sig, saa Skindet
strammede om Ribbenene; der kom Liv i dens sørgmodige Øjne, og den
gik logrende hen til Inger, der venligt strøg over dens glatte, bløde
Hoved, idet hun gik forbi den hen og satte sig paa Hyndet ved Vinduet.

Hun lænede Hovedet til Moderens Skulder, og Moderen kyssede ømt
og let hendes lyse Haar, der mødtes saa smukt med den rene, hvide
Pande; medens det nu var Inger, der saa ud paa Aftentaagerne, hvilede
Moderens Blik ufravendt paa Barnets rolige Ansigt. --

Hvilken Storm skal faa disse lige, fine Øjenbryn til at drage
sig smerteligt sammen, og hvilken Lavhed skal bringe disse blaa,
taalmodige Øjne til at flamme vredt og sorgfuldt.

Saa drog hun hende tættere ind til sig.

Kunde hun holde sit Barn borte fra Verden, -- hvor Lystighed og Kulde
var Herre, -- gemme det hos sig, varmt og trygt, og tilsidst frelse
det med sig i den stille Grav under Kirkens slidte Fliser! --

Der lød Sang udenfor, Klinken paa Døren løftedes, og Germa traadte
ind.

Hun blev ved med sin lystige Sang, medens hun trak Mynden kærtegnende
i Ørene og klappede dens Ryg, saa den velbehageligt kneb Øjnene
sammen; men saa tav hun, løb hen til de to derhenne ved Vinduet og
tog sin vante Plads paa Hyndet ved deres Fødder ...

Og lidt efter begyndte Moderen at synge med en sagte, sødt klingende
Stemme for sine Børn. Helst af alt vilde hun mætte deres Længsler, at
de ikke skulde drage de vilde Stier bort fra hende, ud i Livet, hvor
mangen En bar Kvide i Hjærtet.

Saadan kom en blid og rig Aften tidt og ofte efter en Dag, som, enten
det var Vinter eller Sommer, var kranset af vaagen, trofast Kærlighed.

       *       *       *       *       *

En Sommerdag, da Inger, der nu var vokset til en stolt og høvisk
Jomfru, var gaaet ned til Aaen med en Terne for at to Silke og Lin,
kom Germa løbende. Og som hun sprang af Sted hen ad den grønne Vold,
vinkede hun kaldende paa Søsteren.

Hendes Mund smilte, og hendes Øjne straalede, men hun vilde ikke
fortælle, hvad det var, der havde tændt Glæden hos hende.

Hun tog Inger ved Haanden og drog hende med sig ind i Borggaarden,
ind ad en lille glat, jernbeslaaet, mørk Dør, som Inger aldrig før
havde set aabnet, og op ad en stejl Trappe, hvor Loft, Væg, Trin ere
afslidte, røde Mursten. Smallere og smallere bliver den, jo højere de
stige .... men tilsidst svinge de sig ud af Lugen øverst oppe, og de
staa ved Taarnets Tinde og skærme med Hænderne for Øjnene, der ikke
straks kan se ud i det klare Sollys.

Men snart se de op og ud over det vide Landskab, der blaaner langt,
langt ud -- -- grønne Marker, et enkelt bredkronet Træ, smaa
blinkende Søer, mørke Skove og længst ude -- Havet. Over alt dette et
straalende Sommersolskin og en tindrende blaa Himmel.

-- Inger jublede og strakte sine Arme ud. Hun løb fra Brystværnets
Nordside til dets Sydside, fra Øst til Vest, -- og alle Vegne det
samme -- en Verden, en stor, dejlig Verden, der straalede i Sollys og
ventede i Tavshed.

At eje saa meget vidt og fagert!

Germa sad ubevægelig med Nakken mod den haarde Sten og fulgte med
Øjnene Inger, der var saa ny, som hun stod der; der var i disse Øjne
en Verden, en Verden, der ventede i Tavshed og straalede i ubevidst
Ungdomslykke.

Germa rejste sig pludseligt, gik ned ad Trappen og ind i det øverste
Taarnværelse.

Der stod et stort, sammenrullet Banner hældet op til Muren; hun tog
i Silken og trak Dugen nysgerrigt ud.

Derpaa fik hun Øje paa en lille Kiste paa fire svære Ben, sammenholdt
af et stærkt Kryds.

Hvad gemtes her saa afsides og upaaagtet?

Germa strøg over sit sorte, blanke Haar, som hun plejede, naar noget
betog hende.

Hun vidste ikke selv, hvorfor hendes Hjærte bankede, da hendes varme
Haand greb om den store Nøgle. Hun lo lidt af denne sære Uro, drejede
Nøglen om og aabnede for Kisten.

Der laa en Ring, og inden i den stod »Germa«; det samme Navn kom
frem, da hun havde set lidt paa det snørklede røde og forgyldte, der
stod dernede paa Pergamentslappen, som laa under Ringen. --

Og Hittebarnet læste de faa Linjer, som en vejfarende Munk, til Tak
for Ly og Mad, engang havde prentet om det fundne Barn.

Hun forstod ikke, hvorfor hendes hele Væsen krympede sig af Sorg, hun
harmedes over Taarerne, som blændede hendes Øjne, og uvant med de
Ædderdryp, der sved hendes Sind, vilde hun løbe bort fra dette trange
Rum. Hendes Haand strejfede Banneret; hun vendte sig og tog hastigt
om den tunge Byrde og slæbte den op til Inger.

Og nu blev der Travlhed paa det Taarn, der i Aarevis havde været øde.

To Pigeskikkelser kæmpede for at faa Bannerstagen fastgjort, Banneret
udfoldet. Inger slap Snorene; en sagte Vind spilede Silkedugen ud,
og over hendes Hovede vajede Slægtens blaa Mærke med den gyldne,
flyvende Glente, den som ogsaa havde skinnet i hendes Faders Skjold
den Dag, han faldt mod Rigets Fjender.

De to Jomfruer saa paa hinanden.

Germas Læber bævede .... hvor havde de kunnet tie om dette Dag efter
Dag? Hvorledes skulde hun bære at miste Visheden om en ædel Fader og
en god og statelig Moder? Ak, nu havde de drukket det halve af hendes
Hjærteblod.

Da strakte Inger Armene i Vejret, greb med de slanke, hvide Hænder om
Bannerstagen; Mund og Øje smilte stolt og kækt, og Silken knitrede
og bølgede over hende.

... Men i den Stund følte Germa sig fattig og ene, og i hendes Sind
fæstede den bitre, stærke Udlængsel Bo.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ind gennem de grønlige Ruder, hvor Blyet mange Gange har draget
sine Linjer paa langs og paa tvers, glider det legende Lys i brede,
dæmpede Strømme.

Stabler af Tinfade og Tallerkener staar paa det brede Egebord;
kosteligt vævede Skiveduge ligge Side om Side med farveskønne
Bænkehynder. En Sølvstob, Krus og blanke, tunge Stager med to og
flere Piber skinner; smaa Saltsirkener og enkelte Skeer, hvis lave
Kop er slidt som det udskaarne Benhaandtag, ere skubbede ind, hvor
Plads er i den brogede Dynge.

Inger staar og ser tankefuld paa alle disse hendes Slægts Skatte, som
sjældent kommer frem af de dybe Skabe eller ned fra de lange Hylder
under Loftet. Snart løfter hun paa en af de tunge Stager, snart
glider hendes Haand let hen ad de kølige Linnedduge.

Borgfruen sidder for Enden af Bordet, hvor Skiven er rundet af hendes
Herres og hans Fædres Arme.

Foran hende staar et lavt Skrin med hvide Metalbeslag om det mørke
Træ. Der ligger enkelte Guldkæder deri; men det er ikke dem,
som Borgfruen løfter saa varsomt, -- det er et beskrevet, stivt
Pergament, der rasler, da hun tager det frem.

Hun ser paa den snirklede Skrift, som fortæller om dengang, da hendes
Herre skænkede Gaard og Grund til Kirkens Sankt Andreæ Alter, at
Messer skulde læses for ham og hans og Kongen til evig Tid.

Borgfruen ser op, sukker og fæster det sorgfulde Blik paa Inger, der
bøjer Hovedet dybere.

»Døden er vis, men Timen er uvis. Lad ikke af at vaage og bede i
Bodfærdighed.«

Og hun læser halvsagte videre. --

Germa staar med Ryggen til henne ved Vinduet.

Med Fingeren tegner hun, uden Hensigt, i Karmen efter de smaa
Halvbuer i den røde Mur derovre under Taget.

Bagved sig hører hun Borgfruens sagte dæmpede Stemme, der staver sig
frem gennem Dokumentets Sætninger om de Messer, der skal læses: alle
christne Sjæle til Ro, Lindring og Salighed.

»Ro og Lindring,« gentager Borgfruen tungt.

»Liv og Vildskab,« siger det i Germa. De to derhenne, hendes Kæreste
paa Jorden, lad dem knæle for den tavse Moder, der bøjer Hovedet mod
den kronede Søn, hun bærer paa Armen, lad dem vandre sødt omslyngede
og blidt talende i Rosengaardens tunge Duft; hun elsker dem, hun vil
gøre trælsomt Arbejde for dem og bære det strideste og haardeste dem
til Behag, men der er noget, som kalder bort fra dette stille Sted,
skønt Barneminderne pusler i hver Krog. Her er alting ens, enten
Himlen er høj, blaa og sommerskøn, eller Taagerne graaner, eller
Sneen danser langsomt ned over Borg og Skove. Hun bliver førere i sin
Dragt og maa bøje sig, naar hun gaar gennem Taarndøren, men Dag gaar
som Dag, og Aften kommer som Aften, og saadan vil det vedblive.

Og hun ved, at de Bolstre, hun hviler sit Hovede imod, ere bredte for
hende af Godhed, og ikke fordi hun er deres. Der er ikke det i hendes
Blod, som evigt binder hende til de to derhenne. Hun er ikke Kød og
Blod af den gode Frue og hendes ætstore, modige Herre.

Og hun ligner heller ikke Søsteren. Germa er rank og høj, mørk og
brunkindet. Hun er kraftig og heftig, har Mod til at være kærlig
eller vred, alt som Tid er.

Ingers Legeme er fint, og naar hun kaster sine Klæder og gaar ud i
Vandet, skinner hun hvid og dejlig; hendes Lød er lys, hendes Øjne
ere rolige og blaa. Hun kan tæmme sine Ord, og man ved ikke ret,
om hendes Sjæl kan bølge i Vrede og heftig Kærlighed. Græder hun,
er det i Ensomhed, og aldrig viser hendes Ømhed sig anderledes end
som stille Omsorg. Hendes Pande er som Moderens; naar hun lader
Kammen glide gennem det lange, gule Haar, løfter hun Haanden ganske
som Moderen. Ja, deres Blod rinder i samme Takt, og de ere bundne
til hinanden uløseligt, men hun er det fundne Barn ... den Herre
Christus evigt velsigne den gode Frue, der ikke lod hende falde i
onde Menneskers Vold! --

Fra det øverste af Gavlens Takker fløj en Due op mod den blaa Himmel.

Germa saa langt efter den.

Men saa vendte hun sig og gik forbi Borgfruen og Inger. Deres Blikke
fulgte hende, til Døren lukkedes; to Par Øjne mødtes et Øjeblik ...
Germa er en anden siden hin Dag paa Taarnets Tind; hun tager deres
Kærtegn som en Gave og ikke mere som sin Ret; og hendes mørke Øjne
kan spørge, saa der er kun det at gøre at lægge hendes Hovede mod sit
Bryst og bøje sin Mund mod hendes Pande. --

Men Germa sprang ned ad Trappen, hun stemte sig haardere mod den
tunge Dør end nødigt gjordes.

Da hun stod i den snevre Borggaard, gav hun sig til at løbe ... bort
derfra ... over den gyngende Vindebro -- ad vildsomme Stier langt ind
i Skoven, og der kastede hun sig ned ...

Vage Drømme, der briste, førend de naa ud af Taagen, stryge gennem
hendes Sind, medens Skovens Storhed, -- den, der spirer, og den, der
hvælver sig højt, -- tager hendes smertelige Uro og fylder hende med
en gryende, stærk Livsglæde. --

Saadan er det gaaet mange Gange siden hin Foraarsdag.

Det kan ske for hende, at tunge Anelser med ét kan faa hende til at
løfte Hovedet fra det bløde Mos og stirre ængsteligt frem for sig;
det er, som noget nærmer sig, der kan nedtræde den dybe Glæde, som er
ved at gro op i hendes Sind.

Da kan hun ikke se en Fugl flyve fra Reden, uden at hun synes, den
forvildet _tyer_ til en sikker Kvist, og at dens lille, fjedrede
Moderbryst skælver. Og det er for hende, som de fine, svævende Spind
blive tunge og graa, og som den bløde, blaalige Luft, der legede i
yndig Lethed, bliver tung og kvælende.

Hvorfor blev hun ikke hos de to bag Borgens sikre Mure! Hvorfor var
hun bleven deres, naar hendes Sind og hendes Længsler ikke vilde
gro som deres, -- de to hun elskede og længtes bort fra, som om hun
skulde sørge sig død.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Germa sad ensom langt inde i Skoven og saa paa en Ulveunge, i hvis
Hjærte hendes Kniv havde siddet.

Hun blussede efter Jagtens Fryd og sugede af og til de røde
Bloddraaber bort, som piblede frem af en Rift i Haanden.

Hun var saa stærk og lykkelig i den Stund.

Da knagede Grene inde i Krattet.

Germa sprang op med Kniven i Haand og funklende Øjne.

Var det Ulvehunnen?

Men snart hørte hun en Hest snøfte; Jernklæder raslede, og en stor
Rytter holdt foran hende. En Svend red frem ved hans Side.

Ridderen gloede dumt paa hende gennem Hullerne i Visiret; saa skød
han det op og lo raat.

»En smuk Terne til at feje Asken af Arnen!«

»Og til at sørge for Ganen og anden Glæde,« smiskede Svenden og red
bag hende.

Germas Øjne løb fulde af Vredestaarer. Der var en Ridse ved
Halsringen. Om hun kunde sætte sin Kniv i der! Men saa skulde hun
slippe Ridderen af Syne.

Svenden red tæt til hende.

I samme Nu satte hun i Løb ind i Skoven.

Bag hende knasede de tørre Blade under Ridderens tunge Hest; lidt
borte knækkede Grene: Svenden red uden om hende. Hendes Kinder
glødede, men hendes Sind var koldt og beslutsomt .... fremad endnu
et Stykke, saa naaede hun Kløften; hun vidste et Sted, hvor Brinken
var stejl og overgroet med sejge Ranker, derhen løb hun, der var hun
stærkere end en Rytter i Jernklæder.

Hendes Hjærte hamrede, hendes Kind piskedes af Kvistene, -- men blot
frem. Han kunde bruge hende til at fede Ulve med, om han fik hende
fat! Anderledes blev hun aldrig i Evighed en Mand til Vilje, som
vilde tvinge hende, en Mand med grove Smil om lystne Læber.

I susende Fart fór det unge, stærke Legeme af Sted, bøjende sig for
Grenene og springende over Bækkene.

Svendens Hest prustede der ved Egen bag Krattet ... saa til den anden
Side ind mellem Træerne. Der laa Svenden lumskeligt skjult; han
sprang ind paa hende, de brødes længe; da Ridderen kom, var hendes
Kræfter ødet, og blodig og forreven sank hun sammen, bedende sagte og
mindeligt om Naade og Frihed.

Men han tog hende hoverende i sine jærnklædte, plumpe Arme, løftede
hende op foran sig paa Saddelen og red bort med hende.

Germa spændte endnu engang sin slanke Krop for at styrte sig fra ham
ned mod Jordens barmhjærtigt knusende Sten; men han holdt hende fast
fængslet i sine grove Arme og førte hende til sin fjerne Borg.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Og hvor han rider frem, knuses Blomsterne, de løfte sig ikke mere,
drikke ikke mere Duggen, som de gode Nætter skænke.

       *       *       *       *       *

Der red en Ungersvend i vild Galop, saa stærkt, som Fuglene flyve.
Han jog fremad over bløde Enge og ind gennem tætte Skove, hvor
Grenene strøg hans hede Kind, og visne Blade sparkedes op af deres
aargamle Fred.

Han huggede Sporen i Hestens Side og knugede haardt om den brede
Tøjle, for han var vred af Sorg.

Saa ringe, saa lille var da hans Hjærtenskærs Elskov, at den ikke
kunde hindre hende i at følge den fremmede Ridder til Dansen og lytte
til hans Tale, der var sirlig og kruset som Fjedrene i hans Hat. --
Men _hans_ Ord, hendes tro Bejlers Ord gaar hendes Øre forbi, som var
det blot en Vind, der blæste.

Værd var det for en Svend, der brændte af Harm, at ride som en Nar ad
ukendte Veje.

Da standsede Ungersvenden sin Ganger; den stemte Benene fast mod
Jorden og huggede med Hovedet -- utaalmodig over den strammende
Tøjle, -- saa at den lange Manke faldt ud over Bidslet, og Skumflager
fór tilbage paa den svedblanke Krop.

Ungersvenden blev holdende og stirrede frem for sig, for der, hvor
Taarnet rejste sig bag Krattet, der vajede over den takkede, røde
Murrand det blaa Banner med den gyldne, flyvende Glente, som i mange
Aar havde været skjult.

Hallo! Han rev sin Hue af og svingede den. Nu havde han det at melde
om, som vel kunde fange hans Dames Øre.

Og han kastede sin Hest omkring og jog muntert af Sted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Det Budskab sprang vidt over Lande, at Flaget var hejst paa den
ensomme Borg, hvor ingen Fremmed havde været siden Ridderens Død.
Der taltes om det i Færgemandens Hytte og paa Kongens Slot, og det
drøftedes ved Krus og ved Messe, og snart stundede raske Svende og
alvorlige Mænd til Borgen.

De modtoges høvisk med Vin og Mad og den Besked, at naar Germa var
funden og frelst, da var her et Hjem for Glæde og Lykke, hvortil det
vel nok var værd at drage igen.

Og mangen Svend besluttede at fare viden om for at finde Germa; men
saa gik det dog oftest saadan, at i det første gode Staldbroderlag,
der glemtes det ...

Men der var én, Sivard var hans Navn, og han mødte Inger den Dag, han
holdt i Borggaarden.

Saadan et Løfte om at finde og frelse Germa gav han hende, at hun
strøg sine Hansker af og rakte hans Hest Fodret, og -- paa hans
ridderlige Bøn -- spændte hun hans Harnisk og lagde Tøjlen i hans
Haand.

Og Sivard lod sig kun opholde af de Mødende, naar der var noget at
fritte og spørge, og han fór viden om.

       *       *       *       *       *

Den store Ridder laa dorskt sovende i Højsædet. Ølkanden foran ham
var tømt, og han havde lagt det ene Ben op paa Bordet.

Germa stod ved Vinduet. Hendes Sjæl krympede sig saa smerteligt i
Haabløshed og Væmmelse, at hun ingen anden Lindring vidste end at
drømme sig til Barn paa Borgfruens Skød. Men det var som at drikke
en lokkende Gift, der var dejlig at se, men brændte som Luer, naar
den var nedsvælget. --

Døren gik, og Sivard traadte ind.

»Er I Germa?«

»Ja.«

»Er det ham, som forødte Eders Lykke?«

»Ja.«

»I gaa nu til søndre Led og bier ved min Hest, til jeg kommer.«

Germa gik. Gud i Himlen! At opleve Gengældelsens Stund! I Døren
vendte hun sig og sagde barskt:

»Stød dybt!«

Op ad Trappen steg hun til et ensomt Kammer. Hun strøg hans gyldne
Ringe af sin Arm og sine Fingre, rev hans skinnende Kæder af sit
Bryst og slængte dem hen, flængede den stive Gyldenstykkes Kjortel og
den bløde Underdragt af sig, til hun stod nøgen.

Da brast hun i bitter Graad, slog Vindueslugen op og lod den kolde
Vind vælde ind om sig.

Saa kastede hun sine egne Klæder over sig og gik.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Sivard vækkede den Sovende.

»Ryk Brynjen fra Bjælken. Nu skal Jomfruranet hævnes.«

Den store Ridder lo og væbnede sig.

De sloges længe drabeligt. Sivards Sværdsod sad i Ridderens Side,
men han huggede endnu vældigt. Da tænkte Sivard paa, at Ingers Øjne
var trætte af Taarer, da hun saa paa ham, og han fór mandeligt frem,
og denne Gang hug han Jomfruskænderens Hovede af, saa det drev hen
over Gulvet. --

Ved Leddet holdt Germa paa en stor, graa Hest.

Sivard svang sig paa sin, og de fór afsted over Grønsværet.

Paa en Vej over Heden hørte de bag sig Dønet af den store Ridders
Mænd.

Germa vendte sig. Svenden, som lumskeligt havde fanget hende, red
forrest.

Da bøjede hun sig frem, tog Sivards Hest ved Bidslet og drog den med
sig ind til en Grav, og -- som hun bød -- skjulte Sivard sig bag
Stenene.

Han drog sit Sværd. Germa steg af Hesten.

Da Svenden var ud for dem, gik Germa frem med sin Kniv i Haand.

Hun sigtede roligt, skønt hendes Læber krummede sig i bitter Harm,
og da hun slyngede Kniven fór den ind i hans Strube og sad fast. Med
et Brøl faldt han bagover, gled af Saddelen ned paa Vejen, hvor hans
Hoved slog tungt mod en Sten, saa Skallen brast.

Sivard red frem med Germas Hest; hun svang sig op, og de fór atter
afsted.

Der susede et Par Bolte fra de andre Svendes Armbrøst forbi dem,
men ingen forfulgte dem, thi Vægteren mente, de burde ej raste, men
drage til Gaarden og brygge til sømmeligt Gravøl for deres døde
Herre. --

Siden da talte Germa ikke meget og klagede ikke.

En Nat, da Sivard laa ved hendes Fødder i en stor Skov, mærkede han
vel, at hun lønligt sukkede tungt; da havde han fortalt om Inger,
der spændte hans Harnisk og rakte ham Tøjlen, og hvis Øjne var saa
sorgfulde.

Da de naaede frem mod Borgen, og Germa mødte det første Stod Foler og
saa' de første Glimt af Barndomshjemmets røde Mure og deres Billede
i Voldgraven, gled hun af Hesten, vendte dens Hovede mod den store
Ridders Stald og lod den græsse bort fra hende.

Hun svang sig op bag Sivard, og hun støttede sin Pande mod hans Ryg,
og da hørte han hende græde, som om Gud aldrig kunde løse hende ud af
Angst og Kvide.

       *       *       *       *       *

Da den første sorgfyldte Glæde er omme, vil Inger igen falde til Ro i
det tilvante Hjemmeliv, hvor Sivard som hendes Hjærtenskær skal være
med.

Men Germa er en anden end før.

Vel kan hun nu som i svundne Dage høre paa Eventyr og Sang og gaa
ved Ingers Side og plukke Roser og Gyldenlak, men naar den lyse Dags
vanlige Hændelser ikke mere støtter hendes syge Sind, da brister
hendes Ro, og Sorgen kommer med Natten og sætter sig tungt paa hendes
Sind og skygger for al Tro og al Glæde. --

Ternerne ere gaaede fra Sovestuen, hvor Inger og Germa sove hinanden
nær.

Germa sidder paa Sengestokken, og Inger reder hendes Haar; men Germa
tænker ikke paa, hvor det vælder sort og bølget, hun taler med Ord
saa milde og sagtelig faldende om den Germa, der fri og glad steg op
ad den snevre Trappe til det blændende Solskin paa Taarnets Tind, og
om den Lykke, der fra Barndomsaar til Dødsenstid kunde have groet,
hvis det vrede Lyn ikke blindt havde ramt og slaaet et Saar, hvorfra
Livet rinder ud. -- --

Fra Skabesengens Mørke ser Inger mod det fattige Skær af Dag, der
driver ind gennem Vinduets Ramme.

Der trænger sig over Søsterens Læber andre og haardere Ord, og af dem
staar der som en Dødskulde, der bringer Inger til at skælve.

Søsterkærlighedens Varme ejer Germa ubeskaaret, og derfor gemmer hun
trøstende hendes Haand i sin.

Inger sukker tungt, fordi det kommer over hende som en ængstende
Alvor, at der er den Vaande, som kan skille fra al Glæde, og den Nød,
som aldrig kan forvindes. --

Og Germa døde den Dag, da den første Sne dalede let over de hærgede
Skove og over de ensomme Veje.

       *       *       *       *       *

I Kirkens Halvmørke har Inger ligget knælende paa Flisen, som dækker
Søsterens Grav.

Og hun har -- medens Tankerne flagrer i dybe vildsomme Dale -- læst
og læst de fromme, kosteligt hugne Ord om den, hvis Legeme hviler
her, men hvis Sjæl er hos Gud.

Hendes Hjærte er tungt af en Sorg, som man ikke drømmer sig til og
fra, men som er der altid, og som altid er der lige knugende, fordi
det er den, der har løftet bort fra den jævne Vej, hvor Fødderne gik
deres vante Gang. --

Langsomt vandrer hun hjem ad den ensomme Sti.

I Borgportens dybe Skygge staar hun stille. Hendes Bryst gaar mod det
strammede Klæde og den hvide Halsdug, og hendes Blik glider uroligt,
som vidste hun ikke det Sted, hvor Hvilen er.

Da ser hun en Ternes Ansigt i en Vinduesglug, og rank gaar hun ind i
Gaardens Solskin og hen mod den lille Dør i Taarnet.

Her er Stilhed og Halvmørke.

Men det tvinger hende kun dybere ned i den Sorgfuldhed, der ligger
som en mægtig Orm og ruger over hendes Ungdoms Skatte.

Hun hører raske Mandstrin, og hun ved, hvem det er.

En Kilde af Jubel springer op i hendes Sind og skyller funklende og
friskende gennem hver lønlig Krog.

Der er jo den Svend, som hun har valgt, fordi han ung og modig og af
Kærlighed til hende stred for at bringe Søsteren tilbage; det er jo
hendes Herre, som hun vil give sin Tro og have kær i Glæde og i Sorg.

Og han magter vel at tage Byrden fra hende.

Hun rejser sig og skyder Døren op, saa Solen vælder ind i en bred,
støvfyldt Stribe. --

Sivard gaar mod Borgporten.

Hans Læber ere pressede mod hinanden, og han tvinger sine Tanker til
at mindes den stormende Fylde af Ungdomsmod og Kærlighedslængsel, som
tumlede i hans Sind, da han red gennem Verden og tjente for den, som
har lovet at være hans, men som er en Fremmed selv i hans Armes Hjem.

Det er ikke Sørgen og Minder, han har higet imod.

Hans Vilje har været til at drikke et glad Bryllup og føre en stolt
og yndig Brud til sin Gaard, at sidde ved en statelig Husfrues Side
som Herre ved sit eget Bord blandt ædle Gæster og, naar Tid er, hejse
Sejl i Raa og styre frem over dybe Strømme til Kampe, hvor ingen vil
vige.

Kampe, hvor ingen vil vige!

Viger han ikke daglig fra dristig og fordrende Tale, og fremtvinger
han ikke stilfærdigere Ord, end hans Sind er til, fordi han kun
gennem dem vinder hendes nølende Kærtegn, som han længes imod ....

Da ser han hende staa i Døren, og han mindes hendes bløde Haands
Hvile i hans, og langsomt gaar han imod hende, og hun sætter sig paa
Trappen, og han slænger sig paa det nederste Trin.

Da han ser, hvor blege hendes Kinder ere, bliver han vel trang i
Sind, men der fødes ikke det Ord af hans Kvide, som kan tage hendes
Nød og stille hendes Sorg.

Inger ser ned paa dette bøjede Hovede og denne dunede Kind, der
sænker sig dybere, som begærede den Hvilen mod hendes Knæ.

Det er, som Taarer stiger højere og højere i hende og slæber efter
sig en mørk Angst.

Hun venter og venter .... ogsaa i denne Time forgæves; og han sidder
tavs, medens Minut drypper til Minut og øger den skillende Strøm.

Hvorfor er hun ikke glad, naar hendes Hjærtenskær dog er hos hende?

Er han da ikke den Mand, som kan tæmme hendes Sorg?

Han slynger Armene om hende og knuger sit Hovede mod de fine Knæ, der
runder sig under Kjolens Folder.

Men da er det for hende, som han er en fremmed Svend, med hvem hun
aldrig har nævnt Kærlighedens Navn, og det ridser sig ind i hende med
eneraadende Magt, at den Dag vil aldrig komme, da hun vil lægge sit
Hovede ved hans Bryst og gro ind til den Lykke, som vil læge alle
Saar og blænde for alt Savn.

Og hun rejser sig, og paa ærlig Vis siger hun ham dette.

Han føler et Øjeblik, som al hans spændte Kraft langsomt slappes,
men da han ser hendes Mund og mindes, at han har maattet tvinge sig
ind paa lange Omveje for at opnaa, at den givende bøjer sig mod hans,
da flammer det op i ham med en vred Glæde som hos den, der kaster en
Lænke.

Han gaar mod Døren.

Der standser han.

Men da Sporens Klirren tier, hører han hendes Kjoles Strygen mod
Murværket og hendes lette, rolige Trin opad Trappen, og da løfter han
Benet, sparker Døren op og gaar mod Stalden og sadler sin Hest ...

Inger staar ved Borgetind og ser langt ud over den flade, solnydende
Mark.

Det dundrer over Vindebroen, det blinker i en Staalhue, Solskin leger
blankt over en Hingsts brede Bringe. Det er Sivard, der farer af
Sted, saa det gnistrer af Vejens Stene.

Angst lytter Inger efter, om der ikke er et eneste kaldende Raab i
hendes Sjæl efter ham, men der er kun Visheden om, at den Leg, de
leged, er ude.

Nu hører hun ikke mere Hovenes gungrende Trav. Den urolige Skygge af
Rytter og Hest bliver mindre, forsvinder i en Sænkning. Han rider
frem igen ovre ved Skovens blaanende Væg; ... der rejser han sig i
Sadlen, sætter Horn for Mund og blæser stærkt og uden Melodi.

Saa vender han sin Hest og rider ind i Skyggen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tavs og stolt gik Inger sin Gang. Selv om Visheden om hendes Hjærtes
Tavshed og Tomhed kan brænde som Baal og lægge al Fryd øde, kommer
den Mørkningstime ikke mere, hvor hun skyder Døren op og søger hen
til Moderen, der sidder ene paa Vægbænken og drømmer Slotte af Lys og
Lykke for sit eneste Barn ...

Ingen, ikke engang hun selv, skal have faste Ord for, at hun ikke er
rolig og ikke slider sin Slægts Silke og Skind med stolt Glæde, men
med Længsel efter svundne Dages Stilhed, der, engang brudt, aldrig
bliver mere.

       *       *       *       *       *

Inger gik i Solskinnet og plukkede Rose efter Rose og aandede deres
søde Duft. Hun saa paa Træerne, der voksede opad med smaa, lyse Skud
løftende sig frem paa de krogede, graa Grene.

Men Inger syntes, det var tungt at leve ...

Hun gik op ad Trappen til Fruerstuen, hvor alle de smaa Terner vævede
og sang og talte om Troldskabsfærd, om raske Svende og mandelig Strid
og om Elskovs stærke Baand.

Og Inger satte sig tavs ved Væven, og Skytten gik sin Gang.

Og Hjorten sprang i Skoven, og Dronningen gik alene ind mellem
Stammerne.

Og medens Jomfruerne sang om Kongedatteren, som gav sig og sin Faders
Lande til Hr. Riboldt, tænkte Inger paa, at hun véd, at der drager
den Svend gennem Verden, hvis Hjærte vil le i hans Bryst, om hun
sender ham et kaldende Brevskab ... Men som hun tænker den Tanke,
driver Angstens Dug over hendes syge Sind, for det ved hun, at det
er ikke ham, der kan kysse hendes Mund, til dette Sørgmods Trolddom
viger fra hende, og hun igen er en varm og fager Jomfru ...

Længe var der stille, saa stille, at den, som lyttede, kunde høre
Sommervindens sagte Kog i Voldgravens Siv.

Der var en Jomfru, der begyndte at synge, og de andre stemte villigt
i med Omkvædet.

    Vilmund og hans væne Brud
    -- Strengen er af Guld --
    de legte Tavl i hendes Bur.
    Saa liflig legte han for sin Jomfru.

    De legte Tavl med Guld saa rød,
    og se da græd den væne Mø.

    Hvergang Guldterning randt paa Bord,
    den Jomfru fælded saa modig Taar'.

    »Hvad heller for Guld I græde?
    eller for gode Klæde?

    Græde I Guld, eller græde I Jord?
    Hvad heller den Svend I har givet Tro?

    Græde I Saddel, eller græde I Hest?
    eller den Svend, der Eder haver fæst?«

    »Ikke for Guld jeg græder,
    og ej for gode Klæder.

    Jeg græder ikke Guld, jeg græder ikke Jord,
    saa gerne da gav jeg Eder min Tro.

    Jeg græder ikke Saddel, jeg græder ikke Hest,
    alt med min Vilje haver I mig fæst.

    Mere græder jeg for mit gule Haar,
    at det skal raadne i Vendelsaa.

    Mere græder jeg for Blide,
    som jeg skal over ride.

    Jeg maa vel græde for Blidebro,
    der sunke ned mine Søstre to.

    Der sunke ned mine Søstre to,
    den Tid de lod deres Bryllup bo.

    Og det var mig spaaet, medens jeg var Barn,
    at jeg skulde drukne min Bryllupsdag.«

    »I skulle ikke græde for Blidebro,
    den lader jeg alt med Jærne slaa!

    Jeg lader bygge den Bro saa bred,
    hun koster mig tusend Gylden i Fæ.

    I skulle ikke græde for Blide:
    mine Svende skulle med Eder ride.

    Tolv ved hver Eders Side,
    selv holder jeg Bidsel og Mile.«

    Han lod lægge under Gangeren røde Guldsko,
    og saa rider hun til Blidebro.

    Men der hun kom der midt paa Bro,
    da snaved hendes Ganger i fire Guldsko.

    Hendes Ganger skrænted paa femten Guldsøm,
    neder sank den Jomfru for striden Strøm.

    Jomfruen rakte op sin hvide Hand:
    »Vilmund! Vilmund! Hjælp mig til Land.«

    »Hjælp Dig saa sandt nu den Hellig-Aand,
    som jeg Dig ikke nu hjælpe kan.«

    Hr. Vilmund taler til Smaadreng sin:
    »Du hent mig flux Guldharpe min!«

    Vilmund tager Harpe i Hænde,
    han ganger for Strømmen at stande.

    Han slog Harpen saa saare,
    det hørtes over alle de Gaarde.

    Han slog Harpen over den By,
    og Fuglen af den høje Sky.

    Han slog Løv af Lindetræ
    og Hornen af det levende Fæ.

    Han slog Bark af Birke
    og Knappen af Mari-Kirke.

    Han slog mer end han skulde:
    han slog de Lig af Mulde.

    Han slog Harpen af ret Harm:
    han slog sin Brud af Troldens Arm.

    Op kom den Trold fra Bunde
    med Hr. Vilmunds Mø ved Haande.

    Og ikke hans Brud alene,
    men baade hendes Søstre væne.

    »Vilmund! Vilmund! stil din Ljud!
    Her haver Du igen din unge Brud!

    Vilmund! Du stil din Runeslæt!
    Baade nu hver som han haver Ret!

    Vilmund! Vilmund! Tag din Mø.
    Du lad mig volde mit Vand under Ø!«

    »For vist skal jeg vinde min væne Mø,
    men aldrig skal Du volde Vand under Ø.«

    Vilmund, han legte den Trold til Men:
    han sprak i de haarde Flintesten.

    Hr. Vilmund han red sig op under Ø
    -- Strengen er af Guld --
    saa drak han Bryllup med sin Mø.
    Saa liflig legte han for sin Jomfru.

Der var stille.

Den Terne, som havde sunget for om den mægtige Vilmund, der friede
sin væne Mø fra Trolddom og Fare, sad med Hænderne hvilende og saa
frem for sig med et lyst og yndigt Blik.

En anden begyndte paa Visen om Jomfru Gloriant, der gik til
Fangetaarnet og bad Holger om Hjælp mod den lede Burmand og siden
løste hans Brynje og tog ham i sin Arm.

Men for Inger kom den Stund, at det drog gennem hendes tugtige Sind,
at bedst var det, om en stor Elskov maatte tvinge hende og lægge sit
gyldentrøde Lys over den graa Tid.

Da hvilede hendes Hænder, hun bøjede Hovedet mod Væven, og Taarerne
randt stille ...

Men alle de smaa Terner sang sagtere.

       *       *       *       *       *

Glæden har brede Vinger, og den stærkeste Bølge kan brydes. --

Der kom en Dag, da ædle Gæster holdt for Gaarden.

Borgfruen sad ene og lod Timerne drive deres rolige Vej, da en Svend
meldte om det sjældne Syn af stampende Heste og statelige Herrer og
Fruer.

Borgfruen rejste sig saa hastigt, at Mynden, der havde siddet
logrende og set paa hende, glammede højt ...

Gud i Himlen, sad hun ikke her med Disk og Dug, med en fager Datter
og Mindet om en høvisk Ridder at værne om og saa ...

hun tørrede langsomt en Taare bort, der gled ned over Kinden ...

saa burde den Tid vel komme nu, da andre skulde hylle hendes Barn i
den lune og lystige Fryd, som al hendes Kærlighed ikke havde evnet at
skabe.

Og Mjød og den klare Vin bares frem, og de brede Borde dugedes for
stolte Mænd og gode Kvinder, og da Dansen gik i Gaarden, var det
Inger, der ung og fin dansede forrest, medens Moderen syntes, at nu
bar det igen mod en blid Sommer, hvor al Sorg skulde forvindes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Og som Foraaret blev til Sommer og grønne Spirer til vuggende, gult
Korn, strømmede Gæster til. Og med lige Glæde tog Borgfruen imod dem
alle, baade mod dem, som kom ridende med hundrede Heste og Kjortel og
Kappe af Skarlagen, og mod dem, som kom med Landevejens Støv paa den
simple Vams ...

Men Ingers Hjærte er som lagt i Tvang, skønt hendes Læbe har baade
Smil og muntre Ord.

Men hun har ikke mange Timer til at dukke i sine ensomme Tankers
Væld, for neppe tier de klingende Jægerhorn, før Piber og Giger falde
ind med deres lange, syngende Raab om Dans og Fest.

Dødt og tomt er der i hende, som hun gaar der i den bølgende,
vekslende Skare af Mænd og Kvinder, der er, som de glide af Sted paa
en bred Strøm, hvorover muntre Ord og kække Øjekast farer som Blink
i Skjold og Sværd, naar Solen skinner en frisk Turneringsdag.

Dette var ikke Livet, som hun havde anet det, da hun stod ved
Taarnets Tind og bød det et jublende Velkommen. --

Der er mangen en rask Svend, som helst ser derhen, hvor Inger er, og
mangen ædel Ridder, der vil fæste hende med Tugt og Ære.

Men der er kun én ... han ejer baade Riddersværd og Sangens Gave ...
der, naar Dansen eller Dystridtet gaar, tumler sin Hest paa den vide
Hede, fordi hellere vil han være borte fra hende end lide den Kval,
han lider, naar han ser hende smile, hvor hun helst vilde græde.

Kærlighed er stærk; den kan vel fælde den stejleste Mur.

Og han faar vel de Ord -- om blide eller ramme, -- der kan vinde ham
Jomfruen.

Saaledes tænker Sangeren, og han vandrer sin Vej, som han maa, og er
igen paa Borgen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Der kommer en Time, hvor Jernet springer af hendes Sind, og hendes
hele Hu vender sig mod ham. --

Gigers og Fløjters lystige Lyd dør hen. Ridderne slippe den, de i
Dansen fører ved Haand. Omkring paa Bænkene rejser man sig for at
se ind i Salen. Der bliver saa stille, at man hører to Unges tyste
Hvisken, som straks tier.

Alle se forventningsfulde paa den ridderlige Sanger, der staar midt
for den brede Dør. Hans Legeme vidner om ædel Byrd, og hans Blik er
fast og hærdet i Vilje, og det er skønt af Kærlighed; og der er over
ham den Tankens rene, kraftige Højhed, som drager dem alle i lyttende
Kreds om ham.

Og han synger.

Det luer og gnistrer af hans Ord, og der staar Flammer mod Himlen af
den ubesmittelige Ild.

Inger følte sig sælsomt greben, som var det for _hendes_ Freds Skyld,
at dette skete, og fordi hun sad langt borte, rejste hun sig og gik
nærmere.

Da sænkede hans Blik sig og fæstede sig ved hende, og Stemmen bøjede
sig til milde Ord om Solopgangstimens Kærlighedsbud, naar de spæde
Sædspirer og Pilens smaa rødlige, sammenkrympede nye Blade staar og
gror med Nattens Dug over sig, naar alle Fugle synge og pippe og
fløjte, hver som de kan bedst, men aldrig som ved den klare Dag.

Og hans Stemme bøjede sig til inderlige Ord -- om Aftenen, naar en
eneste Stjerne lyser over de skære, grønlige Farver fra den svundne
Sol, naar der ikke er anden Lyd end den af Agerhønen, der kalder paa
sin Mage inde mellem det tunge, gule Korn, og Lyden af _hans_ Trin,
der gaar de ensomme Stier for at sænke sig i dybe Drømme om én eneste.

Og som han sagde det, var det, som Ord blev ham for trange, og han
løftede den brede viëlle mod sin Kind og spillede over dens Strenge
med den lydige Bue.

Og det klang saadan, at to barske Mænd, mellem hvem Fjendskabet havde
skaaret sin dybe Rende, og de rakte hinanden Haand. -- Kvindeøjne,
der altid havde været sørgmodige, smilte, som var al Sorg forvunden.

Og Inger vidste, at hvis hun ikke havde været, havde Strengene ikke
tonet.

Og da tænkte hun: »Nu har vi to, han og jeg, sammen løftet en Byrde,
og saa maa han gaa hen til mig, tage med sine Hænder om mit Hovede
og bøje det ind til sig, og siden vil vi aldrig skilles hverken Dag
eller Nat.«

Og han sang igen ... med Blikket ud over dem, som seende ind i store
Skove, de ikke kende og aldrig vil naa.

Men Ingers Hjærte er ved at sprænges af en frodig, rodfast Lykke, for
det véd hun, at derind skal hun vandre med sin Haand i hans.

Og hele den store Skare fik det at se, at Inger ... med Dødens Alvor
og Livets Varme i sit unge Sind .... at stolten Jomfru af sig selv,
traadte ud af Kredsen, nærmede sig mere og mere, og da de sidste
Toners Klang var forbi, gled ind i hans Arm og bøjede sit Hovede mod
_ham_. --

Saaledes vandt han Jomfruen.

Og nu kan det siges med Sandhed, at Glæden er kommen i Gaarde.

De, hvis Tanker har været ude paa en ond Færd, følte, at det lede
Troldskab i deres Sind vredes op med Rode; de, hvis dybeste Længsler
hilstes af hans Sang, og de, hvis sorgfulde Hjærter løstes af Pine,
løb jublende imod ham.

Og han slap hende af sine Arme og rakte hende sin Haand, hun lagde
sin i hans, og Borgfruen og gamle, kloge Riddere lagde deres over,
og de klappede dem paa Ryggen, som Fædrenes Skik var, og fra det var
sket, regnedes Sangeren og Inger for Fæstemand og Fæstemø at være.

Og de blanke Sølvbægre klang, og Ord fløj til den, de maatte. Gamle
barske Mænd brummede deres Ungdoms minderige Sange, og Fruer med
spæde Stemmer nynnede med.

Det var fagert at lytte til Bruset af Glæden.

I den høje Sal og i den lune Borgestue bar Sang og Dans gennem
Timerne, til det begyndte at lysne i Øst. -- --

Naar Solen stiger, smelter Rimen af Skoven.

       *       *       *       *       *

Inger og Sangeren gik under Lindene i den blide Sommernat.

Og ved det Stevne fik hun Lykken, hvis Plads hun havde værnet i sit
Hjærte gennem onde Aar.

Som Minut dryppede til Minut, fæstede Kærlighedens stærke Rødder
sig fastere om hver Tanke, hver Længsel og hvert spirerigt Haab, og
i hendes Sind ridsede det sig ind med eneraadende Magt, at der var
ingen Svend til i Verden uden ham, under hvis Kappe hun nu gik, som
hun kunde give sin Tro, for med ham vilde hun leve og dø, og ham
vilde hun følge, om saa Jorden skulde briste under dem.

For han var den Mand, som hun elskede. --

Og alle Jordens Urter stod i Blomst.

       *       *       *       *       *

Og Tiden kom, da Inger spændte Brudesko om sin hvide Fod.

Men hendes Vej til Kirkens Brudebænk gik hen over Søsterens Grav, og
hendes Blik sænkede sig og læste den prydede Flises stive Bogstaver:

»Her bor Germas Legeme, men hendes Sjæl er hos Gud«. --

Og alle de dybe Vande og alle de vundne Riger!




REKREATION.


Paa en af de mere afsides Bænke i Provinsbyens Lystskov sad en
Sommeraften et gammelt Par.

_Han_ havde lænet sig tilbage med paatagen Hjemmevanthed og
betragtede opmærksomt de Spadserende og holdt Øje med de Herrer
Musici, der stod samlede i smaa Klynger paa den aabne Estrade, hvor
de snart skulde begynde at musicere.

_Hun_ sad yderligt, omtrent uden at røre sig; hendes lille, magre
Skikkelse skjultes næsten helt af et stort, sort Sjal, og lige
fra den furede Pande og til Nakken dækkedes hendes Hovede af en
vindrueprydet, mørk Tøjhat.

Af og til knipsede han med mange Omstændigheder Asken af sin
Cigarstump og lagde, lidt besværligt, det ene Ben over det andet, saa
at de snævre Benklæder trak sig et Stykke op over Vandstøvlerne.

De to gamle talte ikke meget. Sagde han en lille Bemærkning, smilede
hun lidt og svarede ja eller nej ...

En tyk Madam med rappe Bevægelser og et Par Børn efter sig gik flere
Gange forbi og saa opmærksomt paa Manden og Konen.

Saa blev hun staaende foran dem og sagde:

»Go' Da'! Er det ikke gamle Skoma'er Frandsens?«

Manden rørte sin Hat med Pegefingeren og svarede:

»Jo, det er saamænd.«

»Ka' De ikke kende mig?«

»Ja, det er jo saadan, vi ser jo ikke saa maj' u'mærket, ska' jeg si'
Dem!«

»Det var jo mig, der var Bypi'e hos gamle Apoteker Friises, da De
boede i Ba'gaarden!«

»Herregu' er det det. Hva' he' De? -- Ja, de er dø'e nu, hele
Familien, Herregu' ja.«

Man gav hinanden Haanden og Skomageren vedblev:

»Vil De ikke sitte ne'? Værsgo', Madam.«

»Aa, la' gaa da.«

»Det er vel Deres?« Han pegede med sin Stok efter Børnene, der
øjeblikkelig var løbne hen til Dansepladsen og havde givet sig til at
klatre og krybe gennem Stakittets Tremmer.

Madammen rejste sig hurtigt, gik et Par Skridt frem, saa at det sorte
Kjoleskørt svingede over den brede Bag.

»Hans Petter, Thea, læg Hattene herhen.«

Hans Peter og Thea smed hellere end gerne Hovedtøjet og sprang af
Sted igen.

Manden spurgte:

»Er De gift?«

»Ja, jeg er,« svarede hun roligt.

Den gamle Mand fortsatte Samtalen; han talte langsomt og vægtigt;
hans Ægtehalvdel og sædvanlige Tilhører plejede ikke at mangle
hverken Tid eller Taalmodighed.

»Me' Forlov, Madam, hva' er Deres Mand?«

»Ja, vi er jo Værtshusholder u'e ve' Markedspladsen. Det er vos, der
har Ma'kisser u' te Fortovet me' Borde og Stole!«

Den gamle Kone vendte sig lidt og saa paa hende, men indtog straks
igen sin Stilling yderligt paa Bænken; de andre talte bag hendes Ryg.

»Det er s'men helt rart at komme lidt u',« konverserede Madammen.

»Er det første Gang, De er i Skoven!«

»Ja, sidste Aar ku' det sgu ikke naa sig; om Sønda'en har vi jo
travlt, og nu paa Søndag kommer der Særkus, det gi'r jo altid no'en
Fortjeneste; men saa var 'et jo, at Kar'sellen gle' i Da', saa mente
jeg, at nu sku' det vær'.«

»Ja, vi har jo osse sku' været a' Ste' hele Somren; men Mutter har
ikke ment, hun ku' være fra Huset. Saa i Dag saa maatte jeg sgu
ligefrem befale hende at trække i Strøtøjet.«

De to gamle lo fornøjet.

Manden fortsætter, henvendt til Madammen.

»Saa har De det vel helt godt?«

»Ja s'men, det har vi jo da. Sli'e maa vi jo naturligvis. Men nu ka'
de to ældste Pi'er da hjælpe te i Geskæften.«

»Naa, De har fler' end de to der?«

»Vi har havt femten.«

»Det var manne Børn,« siger den gamle Kone stilfærdigt.

Madammen tilføjer:

»Men de fem er da dø'e.«

»Saa er de bevaret!« siger Manden, der ser ud, som han har opgjort et
noget vanskeligt Regnestykke.

»Den sidste ha'e vi paa Sy'ehus i fem Aar.«

»Hvor maje maatte De betale dér?«

»Ja, det var strenge nok, det var hal'a'en Krone om Da'en. Det sidste
Aar nøjedes vi da med en Krone.«

»Ja, det løver sgu op, gør'et.«

»Min Mand er jo ellers hos Boubinder Knap.«

»Hva' ka' det nu saadan smi'e a' sig, særka?«

»Ha' faar jo to Kroner om Da'en, men saa er'et jo godt fast Arbe',
og saa er 'et jo det, vi osse maa betragte, at er'et en Da', der er
travlt eller Marke', saa ka' ha' si'e: i Dag, Mester, kan jeg nu ikke
komme; og saa er der ikke vi'ere ve' det, saa hjælper ha' te' hjemme.«

»Ja, der ka' jo være nok.«

»Ja, vi har s'men ikke saa lidt; der ka' godt komme Folk drattende
ind, som De sku'te tænke det!«

»Saa, ka' der det?«

De gamle vendte sig spørgende mod Madammen, som beredvillig fortsatte:

»Jo, forle'en kommer s'men denne her Greve, hva' det nu er ha'
he'er.«

»Uh ha,« siger den gamle Kone i en blid Tone og med et Smil.

»Ha' vilde jo ha' en Ølbajer, som de si'er Soldaterne. Og Trine var
s'men li'e ved at falde i Baldaane af Forbavselse, men Fatter var da
hjemme, og han sto' jo saa og g'ore Karosser for ham, saa jeg ku' jo
nok se, det var i lidt fint!«

»Saadan no'en prutter ikke i no'en Slavs Forretning!« sagde den gamle
Mand sindigt og vægtigt. »Kommer de ind i en Botek, saa si'er de
bare: vil De sende det, hvor maje har jeg at betale? Væsgo'. Vupti.
-- Basta.«

»Naar d'itte har for langt te Kontanterne!«

De lo alle tre.

Madammen vedblev:

»Ha' kom jo u'e fra Eksercissen.«

»Je' har osse været Soldat. Sikken et Bryst je' ha'e den Gang. Ikke
Mutter?« Manden retter sig og ordner lidt ved den hvide Krave, der
hænger slapt om det indfaldne Bryst. »Nu har je' tidt lidt Hoste, men
saa er det sundt at komme u' i frisk Luft.«

»Det er'et vel,« svarede Madammen ligegyldigt. »Vi faar nu sommeti'er
Fribillæt til Særkus. Lidt Fornøjelse ska' man jo unde sig.«

»Ja, lidt Fornøjelse skal man unde sig,« gentog den gamle Kone med
sin trætte Stemme.

»Ja, Mutter gaar nu paa Kirkegaarden en Gang imellem.«

Konen saa mildt op.

»Je' har jo gamle Bekendtere deru'e.«

»Saa vasker hun deres Ligsten,« fortæller Manden.

»Det var da et farligt Mas! Slæver De Remedjerne me' deru'?« spørger
Madammen.

»Det er jo bare en bitte Sæve og en Børste i en tom Spand,« svarer
den gamle Kone.

»Hun var nu i 53 me' Etatsraa' Plums i Flensborg; hun tjente dem i 10
Aar, før vi kom sammen, ska' jeg si'e Dem, Madam.«

»Det er Etatsraa'ens Sten den store me' Billedet lige inden for
Laagen,« oplyser den gamle Kone. Efter en lang Pavse vedbliver hun:
»Jeg kender jo osse gamle Fru Møller og Julie Lind, de ligger ne'
etter Krigsgravene. Det er jo saadan li'som gamle Bekendtere.«

»Er De ellers rask, Madam Frandsen?«

»Vi maa'tte klave. -- Rosken aa Bry'en i Lemmerne. -- Herregu' ja.«

»Det kniver, Mutter, naar du ska' lette dig om Maarnen,« siger Manden
i en opmuntrende Tone. »Christian, vores Søn, han er nu Mursvend, og
han ska' jo ha' Kaffe om Maarnen, inden han gaar.«

Den gamle Kone fortsætter paa sin rolige, blide Maade: »Saa ska' jeg
jo ha' redt Seng og fejet Gullerne, og saa skal jeg jo te og lempe en
bitte Middesma', til Christian kommer hjem. -- Saa kan jeg s'men være
saa træt, saa træt,« siger hun som til sig selv.

»Du har nu slidt al din Ti', Mutter!« Manden klapper hende muntert
paa Ryggen.

Hun smiler. »Naar jeg saa har sittet to, tre Timer me' min
Strikkestrømpe, saa er jeg li'som helt rask igen.«

»Ja, hænge i maa vi sgu!« udbryder den tykke Madam pludselig paa sin
raske, energiske Maade og slaar sig paa Benene.

»Ja, det er ikke saadan at komme frem,« siger Manden, og langsomt
fortsætter han: »Er man saa i Stilling, saa er det svært at holde
sig. Min Søn, han ku' nu ikke.« Han hæver Stemmen: »Men jeg kan; jeg
holder den nok, jeg holder den nok gaaende i den Ti', vi har te'ba'e.
Ikke Mutter? Der er jo det me' Botek og Reklama, som de raaver paa,
og trykte Anbefalingskort, og der er jo manne Skoma'ere nu, men mine
gamle Kunder glemmer mig ikke -- nej, mine gamle Kunder glemmer mig
ikke.«

De faldt i Tanker alle tre.

Ovre fra den anden Del af Skoven lyder Tonerne af et Par skrattende
Horn, der ustandseligt spille Socialistmarchen.

Det kommer nærmere og nærmere. Til sidst hører man enkelte Stemmer,
der om og om igen synge: nu dages det Brødre, det lysner i Øst.

Toget gaar forbi.

Det er de to Rækker, der ere Orkestret nærmest, som synge. De andre,
Mænd med Madkurve og Koner, der trille Barnevogne eller have Børn paa
Armen eller ved Haanden, gaa i rolig Passiaren; nogle enkelte hilse
paa Skomageren.

»Det er dem, der strikker!« hvisker han til Madammen, der ser med et
underlig blandet Udtryk efter den lille Klynge.

Da den er borte, siger Manden vemodigt:

»Der gaar nu de og driver.«

»Ja, det er ikke til at forstaa, hva' der ska' komme u' af det. Nu
Rosalje, hun bor paa Kvisten, hun gik paa Fabrek og ha'e sine go'e
ni Kroner om Ugen; nu gaar hun paa Daskens hver Da' i hvidt Skørt --
Undertøjet har hun ju'te en Stumpe a'. Og tjene vil de ju'te nu til
Dags!«

»Saa gør je'te maje Honnør for de Pi'er!« kom det i en usædvanlig
bestemt Tone fra den gamle Kone.

Manden siger med et Suk:

»Ja, hva' ska' der blive a'?«

»Saa gaar de nok og synger, men de er sgu' saa pirne alligevel og ka'
fløje i Flint over ingenting.«

»Hvis de nu taver?«

De sidde lidt tavse alle tre.

Madammen spørger haardt:

»Hvis de nu taver ... alle de Roljer. Hvodden gaar'et saa?«

»Hvordan det gaar? Jeg skal sige Dem, Madam, hvordan det gaar.«

Skomageren sætter sig til Rette. Hans Kone vender sig lyttende imod
ham.

»Hvis De nu vil følge me'. Ser De ... naar nu alle Mestrene,
Skoma'erne, Skræ'erne, Malerne, hvem De nu ka' nævne, si'er: nu
lukker vi og derme' Basta: Hva' saa?«

»Ja, hva' saa?«

»Saa ka' d'itte betale te Strikkekassen mer. Og saa spør' je': hva'
bli'r saa Enden paa det?«

Madammen ser betænksomt og alvorligt frem for sig, som anede hun sine
Kunders og sin egen Ruin.

Manden vedbliver forklarende:

»Fabrikanterne taver jo osse hver Da'. De ska' jo betale Renter af
saa maje. De bliver til sidst ke'e af det.«

»Saadan no'en sku' skamme sig og blive kiv i'et over den Slavs.«

»Naar de nu'tte mer ka' svare hver sit eller køve Malerier og Bøjer
og Støvler og Klæ'er. Og saa Huslejen. Saa bliver sgu Enden paa det,
at de lukker hele Menasjen. Og saa er det hele forbi. Ja, det er nu
min Forklaring, Madam. Det ka' osse vær', at de sætter det hele paa
Aktier, og saa smelter Pengene hen, og saa er der til sidst ingen,
der vil begynde paa noget. -- Det er nu min Mening!«

»Ja, trist er'et li'e godt!«

»Men saa er vi vel Gu'skelov dø'e. -- Ikke Mutter?«

Konen svarede mildt: »Ja, bare vi var vel i Jor'en.«

Manden sukkede og tændte sin Cigarstump igen ...

Hans Peter kommer styrtende imod dem.

Moderen raaber: »Se dig for Dreng, sikken du skøvler a'!«

Hans Peter snubler over sine alt for store Snørestøvler, men er
straks paa Benene igen og udbryder hæsblæsende:

»De ska' spelle nu. De kom me' den store Tromme!«

»Saa bliver vi og hører et Stykke ... Pas nu paa dine ny Bukser, Hans
Petter!«

»Ska' vi osse høre et Stykke, inden vi rokker hjema', Mutter?«

»Vi ska' vel snart hjem og i Seng, je' ska' jo ti'lig op.« Den gamle
Kone trak Sjalet tættere om sig.

»Vi ska' bare høre et Stykke ... Naar nu bare det bliver et af de
go'e gamle.«

Det giver et Ryk i den lille, magre Kone, da Orkestret i det samme
sætter i med de første Akkorder af Elverhøjsouverturen.

Værtshusholdermadammen forsøgte at fortsætte Samtalen, men de to
gamle svarede adspredt. De var altfor optagne af at høre efter
Musikken.

Da Slutningssangen klinger mod dem, puffer Skomageren fornøjet til
sin Kone og hvisker:

»Den kender du, Mutter!«

Hun nikker smilende.




DEN HØJE MAND.


Foraarsnattens lette Mørke hviler ved Foden af Egnens mange Bakkedrag
og mellem de kraftige Planter i Grøfternes fugtige Bund. Men
Højdernes runde, lave Rygge har bevaret et svagt Skær af Dagens gode
Lys, og Himlen er idel Klarhed; Skoven og de fjerne Hytter staa som
sorte Volde mod denne store, gullige Hvælving, hvor en enkelt bleg
Stjerne dukker frem af det bløde, slørede Lys.

Og Lyden af en Ugles hastige Vingeslag og af Draaberne, der siver fra
de brune Pløjemarker ned imod Engenes gulstrøede Grønne, og sagte,
rene Klange, som de travle Dage ikke kende og ikke kende Navn til, er
den hvilende Jords Aandedrag i det tidlige Foraars stille Nat. --

Men hvor Buskene tættede sig til Gærde om en Have, Urterne groede i
lige Rækker, og Tulipanerne stod i Bede ved Stuehusets Havedør, der
var andre Lyde: Trampen af Fødder, Latter og taktfast Violingniden.

Bonden giftede sin Datter bort med en flink Karl.

Medens Sognets Piger og Karle, de gifte Folk og Fremmede fra Byen
dansede og morede sig, gik Bonden omkring og sørgede for Mad og
Drikke, og hans gamle Hustru færdedes med gæstmilde Lader mellem
Køkken og Stuer.

Der var en Typograf fra Byen og nogle unge Bønder, der sad sammen og
drak. Da de blev højrøstede og røde i Hovederne, gik Bonden dem ofte
forbi med kold Mine uden at skænke i deres Glas. Derfor rejste de sig
og slentrede gennem den vognfyldte Gaard ud paa Vejen.

Det lette Mørke hvilede under de hvidblomstrede Tjørnebuske og blandt
de kraftige Planter i Grøfternes fugtige Bund. Men Skovene stod som
sorte Volde mod den lyse, store Himmel, og de krogede Hyldetræer
kastede vage Skygger paa Bøndergaardenes hvide Længer.

Landevejens lyse, brede Stribe svingede forbi den lille Landstation,
ud over Skinnerne og drejede om til Kroen.

Henimod den drev den glade Skare.

Typografen bandt et Lommetørklæde om Hovedet og sprang frem og
tilbage og gjorde Løjer, og de unge Bønder lo skraldende og
beundrende.

Stjernen blinkede. I de lave Enge sivede det sagte om Græssets
Rødder, Køerne laa og gumlede inde paa Marken, en Fugl flyttede sig
forskræmt, Rugen vuggede sagte sine groende Aks.

Typografen vrøvlede ustandseligt, og Bønderne gik fra Kærester og
Koner og de gæstfri Værtsfolk ned mod Kroen.

Sita's origin has been the subject of scholarly studies. Sita's birth and parentage have been depicted differently in different versions of Ramayana.[6]
Valmiki's Ramayana: In Valmiki's Ramayana and Kamban's Tamil epic Ramavataram, Sita is said to have discovered in a furrow in a ploughed field, and for that reason is regarded as a daughter of Bhūmi Devi[7] (the goddess earth), Sita Birthstar is Ashlesha Constellation . She was discovered, adopted and brought up by Janaka, king of Mithila, and his wife Sunayana.
Ramayana Manjari: In Ramayana Manjari (verses 344–366), North-western and Bengal recensions of Valmiki Ramayana, it has been described as on hearing a voice from the sky and then seeing Menaka, Janaka expresses his wish to obtain a child. And when he finds the child, he hears the same voice again telling him the infant is his spiritual child, born of Menaka.[6]
Janka's real daughter: In Ramopkhyana of the Mahabharata and also in Paumachariya of Vimala Suri, Sita has been depicted as Janaka's real daughter. According to Rev. Fr. C. Bulcke, this motif that Sita was the real daughter of Janaka, as described in Ramopkhyana Mahabharata was based on the authentic version of Valmiki Ramayana. Later the story of Sita miraculously appearing in furrow was inserted in Valmiki Ramayana.[6]
Reincarnation of Vedavati: Some versions of the Ramayana suggest that Sita was a reincarnation of Vedavati. Ravana tried to molest Vedavati and her chastity was sullied beyond Ravana's redemption when she was performing penance to become consort of Vishnu. Vedavati immolated herself on a pyre to escape Ravana lust, vowing to return in another age and be the cause of Ravana's destruction. She was duly reborn as Sita.[6]
Reincarnation of Manivati: According to Gunabhadra's Uttara Purana of the ninth century BCE, Ravana disturbs asceticism of Manivati, daughter of Amitavega of Alkapuri, and she pledges to take revenge on Ravana. Manivati is later reborn as the daughter of Ravana and Mandodari. But, astrologers predict ruin of Ravana because of this child. So, Ravana orders to kill the child. Manivati is placed in a casket and buried in the ground of Mithila where she is discovered by some of the farmers of the kingdom. Then Janka, king of that state adopts her.[6]
Ravana's daughter: In Sanghadasa's Jaina version of Ramayana of the 5th century BCE, Sita, entitled Vasudevahindi, is born as daughter of Ravana. According to this version, astrologers predict that first child of Vidyadhara Maya (Ravana's wife) will destroy his lineage. That's why Ravana abandons her and orders the infant to be buried in a distant land where she is later discovered and adopted by Janka.[6]


Da de vilde gaa ind ad dens Dør, rejste en høj, gammel Mand sig fra
Trappestenen og stillede sig i Vejen for dem. Han løftede sin Arm og
sagde med indtrængende, klingende Stemme:

»Holdt! Sløv ikke dit Blik og dys ikke din Sjæl. Vaag og bed. Se, i
denne Nat forgaar Jorden!«

»Det var som Satan!« brølede Typografen; »hvad i hede Helvede er Du
for en Obskuranter og Pietist! Gaa væk. Vi ere aandsfrie Mænd.«

Den høje Mand saa venligt iagttagende paa ham med sine alvorlige,
gode Øjne, men veg ikke fra Døren.

En af Skaren sagde udjævnende:

»Det er bare den gale Student fra Fattighuset.«

Straks snakkede de alle villigt i Munden paa hverandre for at oplyse
den lystige Typograf.

»Han skriver af for Skolelæreren og Præsten. Han er sgu Student.«

»Student -- jo vel!«

»Gu' er han Student. Men der var en Bog, der gjorde ham gal.«

»Den Bog hed vel nok Lisbeth fra Bakkegaarden.«

»Og den blev fæl til at rende efter Mandfolk og Brændevin.«

»Han er med og leder de blinde Musikanter, og saa kan han spille
Theater for os, naar han ikke er altfor tosset.«

»Gaa nu hellere hen i Gildesgaarden, Student. Gaa nu -- ellers faar
Du Prygl af blinde Søren.«

Den høje Mand bøjede sit Hovede saa dybt, at hans lange, hvide Haar
faldt ned over den hvælvede, furede Pande. Raadvild veg han til Side,
pint af Typografens Tilraab, men uafbrudt mumlende: »I denne Nat; jeg
har Brevskab derpaa. I denne Nat!«

Fra Skyggen af Rejsestalden saa han, at en Flok unge Piger og Koner
med hinanden under Armen kom ned ad Vejen og kaldte paa Karlene.
Dyrlægen, med Frakkekraven op om Ørene, Høkeren og et Par ældre
Bønder gik smaasnakkende bag ved dem.

Typografens unge Hustru stod længe og saa paa sin Mand, der lo
støjende af Raaheder og tumlede meningsløst omkring. Hans brede,
kloge Pande var rød, og hans gode Øjne saa stivt og vredt efter hende.

Hun syntes, at i dette Øjeblik veg hun ud af en hegnet, solfyldt
Have, hvor hun aldrig mere skulde komme. Men for sit ufødte Barns
Skyld gik hun hen og tog hans Haand og hviskede det Navn til ham, som
ingen uden hun og han kendte, det Navn, som de varede om, fordi det
var digtet i deres Kærligheds lifligste Time.

Men han skød til hende, som om hun var en paatrængende Skøge, og til
Bøndernes Morskab vrængede han Navnet efter.

Den høje Mand hørte det fra sin Plads i Rejsestaldens Skygge; og han
lukkede sine Øjne, fordi han ikke kunde taale at se hende tage sig
saa raadvild til Hjærtet. --

Saa snart han ikke mere saa Mændene og Kvinderne foran Kroen,
begyndte Dagens og Aftenens Syner at bore sig ned i hans Sinds Dybde
ad de eneste Veje, som førte gennem hans Bevidstheds Taager.

Drikkedjævlen har været i Gaarde. Ikke engang Præst og Skolelærer
kender ham, for han er venlig og ydmyg, indsmigrende og munter,
og derfor danse unge, uskyldige Piger ved hans Haand, medens han
uforstyrret sænker sin Gift i Sjælene, Guds rette Ejendomme. Tavse,
kloge Mænd blive aabenmundede og dumme. Unge Karle, som elske, blive
blinde og tror at se deres Hjærtes Udkaarne i hver Kvinde, og de give
deres helligste, bindende Ord til den første, der vil høre det. En
Mand, der Aaret før med Bøn og Graad har tigger om sin gamle Mors
Tilgivelse for en Forbrydelse mod Ære og Ret, som den smilende Djævel
havde forledt ham til, haaner i Aften Moderen, som advarende tager
om hans Haand, der griber efter Giften; -- og hele Sognet hører hans
vrede Ord.

En dygtig Bonde, som Dagene igennem slider og arbejder sammen med sin
Hustru for dagligt Brød, øder i Spil paa en Time, hvad der skulde
skaffe Midlet til deres syge, eneste Barns Frelse. --

Den høje Mand vaandede sig og aabnede sine Øjne, hvor Lidelsen
brændte. Hjælpeløs saa han ud over Marker og Enge; men da fornam
hans udækkede Sind, at det var en af Naturens hellige Timer, hvor
Mennesket, der gaar ind i dens Rige for at lytte til dens Toner,
lytter saa længe, at det hører sin egen inderste Sjæls sølvklingende
Musik.

En ung Kvinde gik alene ind over Markstien og saa paa de duggede
Blomster og op mod Stjernen og den lyse Himmel, medens hendes Elsker
sad med tungt Hovede og sløve Øjne og lo meningsløst. --

Men Høkeren smilede affabelt og sagde til Sogneraadsformanden:

»Man maa more sig, medens man er ung og fri.«

Sogneraadsformanden nikkede anerkendende og svarede vægtigt:

»Vist saa; blot med Maade.« --

I Skyggen ved Rejsestalden, hvor den høje Mand med skælvende,
hurtige Hænder gravede sig et Skjul mellem Halmknipperne, standsede
Typografens Hustru med Forvalteren; og hun lod sig kysse af hans
blussende Læber, og hun lod sit uskyldige Sind besudle af hans urene
Ord; i Fortvivlelse og Trods vilde, _vilde_ hun dynge mørke, fremmede
Begivenheder over det rædselsfulde, som skete før.

Da løftede den høje Mand Hovedet og saa op med et Blik, der straalede
af en fast og pludselig Beslutning; han knugede sine foldede Hænder
mod sin Pande og hviskede: »Ikke endnu Herre, ikke endnu!« Og han
løb, som den løber, der bærer sit Kæreste fra forfølgende Fjender.

Udenfor Kroen tømtes Flaskerne, indtil to Brødre yppede Kiv og
begyndte at slaas.

I det samme kom Stationsforstanderen. Hans guldsnorede Hat sad paa
Snur, hans Uniformsfrakke stod aaben, og han slog ud med Haanden og
raabte:

»Lad nu være med det Børnevrøvl, mine Herrer; her skal de se utrolige
Løjer.«

»Værs'artig, værs'artig mine Herschafter, ingenting for Voksne og det
halve for Børn, Folk uden Hoved gaar gratis ind!« raabte Typografen.

Stationsforstanderen stillede sig i Attitude med den ene Haand ind
paa Brystet og bukkede dybt. Man var Embedsmand, men havde dog
heldigvis Aand og Gemyt nok til at gaa ind paa en Spøg.

Derpaa fortalte han -- stadig afbrudt af Typografen, som var i
febrilsk Bevægelse for ikke at blive døsig.

»Jo, ser de, blinde Sørens Prygleknabe kom jo ind til mig paa
Kontoret med dette lange Telegram. Om jeg straks vilde afsende det?
Jo, det vilde jeg da nok, men det var dyrt. Ja, Mammon havde han
rigtignok ikke, men om en liden Stund skulde han ofre os sit Hjærte,
som hele Livet havde lidt af ulykkelig Kærlighed --«

»Ulykkelig Kærlighed!« Dundrende Latter.

»Ulykkelig Kærlighed, ja, til Gudsbilledet i Mennesket eller saadan
noget lignende højtravende Sludder.«

»Hans Hjærte i Betaling. Kan De give tilbage paa den Mønt,
Stationsforstander?«

Skraldende Latter.

»Havde det endda været hele Kroppen. Hva' Hr. Dyredoktor?«

Dyrlægen svarede tvært spøgende:

»Han fik sgutte første Klasses Stempel, det magre Spektakkel!«

Stationsforstanderen kom igen til Orde:

»Jeg sagde jo naturligvis ja og tog Papiret. Nu skal de høre.«

»Hold op at tviste. Silentium. Dixi. Hols Mauls, I Herrer!« tordnede
Typografen.

Stationsforstanderen læste ironisk-højtidelig:

»Telegram til Gud i Himlen. Jeg kender din Beslutning. Men Herre, lad
ikke Verden forgaa, medens her er en Djævel, der tager haardt om de
varme, bankende Hjærter og lammer de Hænder, som vil lindre Smerte og
Nød. Lad ikke Verden forgaa, medens den Djævel lærer Pigen Svig og
Løgn i samme Øjeblik, hun kysser sin trofaste Elskers Læber, lærer
hende Spot og Spe, naar hun gaar fra hans udstrakte Arme. Alle er mod
alle. Den, der længes, skal trampes. Den, der bløder, skal slaaes.
Den, der kryber om paa Marken for at finde et Hul, hvor ingen Lyd kan
naa ham, skal slæbes ind i Dansesale og Krostuer. Herre, lad ikke
Verden forgaa, medens alle er mod alle og vil hugge Klør og Tænder i
de pinende Saar. Herre, afvend din Vrede, tag mig som Sonoffer, jeg
giver dig mit Liv!«

»Og jeg giver en Omgang paa Kroen!« brølede Typografen til Bønderne,
der stod stille og halvvejs generte: »Træd indenfor, Hr. Banemand,
og lad os være fri for mere af det Kællingesludder.«

Men Toget var ved at komme, saa Stationsforstanderen maatte være
paa Perronen. Han satte Huen lige, knappede Frakken og gik med
hele Skaren ned for at inspicere Stationskarlen, der havde bragt
Signalerne i Orden og lagt Posttasken ud.

Ved Ventesalen brændte et Par Lygter; der stillede Skaren sig i Geled
for -- efter Typografens Kommando -- »at repræsentere Sognet for de
ærede Rejsende.«

Typografen begyndte at holde Tale, men tav leende, da han fik Øje paa
den høje Mand, der stod længst borte paa den lange, smalle Perron med
Armene strakt mod Himlen.

»Se, hvor Raden staar og kiger Stjerner; lad os faa mere Grin med
ham.«

En ældre Bonde svarede:

»Lad os nu undgaa Skandale her paa offentligt Sted; vi maa se at faa
ham hjem. Jeg giver Vogn; gaa Du hen og snak med ham, Typograf, det
maa Du forstaa.«

Typografen tog Lommetørklædet af Hovedet og svarede godmodigt:

»Javel, jeg snakker godt for ham.«

Han tog Bonden i Knaphullet. »Det er individuelt med saadanne
Fornemmelser, man maa bortforklare hans daarlige Humør, for ser
I, er han drukken, saa er der noget, der hedder en overordentlig
Modtagelighed, og --«

»Javel, men gaa nu bare. Nu piber Toget.«

Typografen gik hen mod den høje Mand, der havde kastet sig paa Knæ
med Hovedet bøjet tilbage og Hænderne foldede.

Toget brusede ind.

Den høje Mand væltede sig ud foran Lokomotivet og knustes.

Typografen fik ondt og ravede tilbage. Nede paa Perronen raabte de
og løb forvildet mellem hverandre. Dampen hvæsede ud. Passagererne
søgte at faa Kupédørene op. En ung Pige græd. En Handelsrejsende med
Spillekort i Haanden laa halvt ud af Vinduet og raabte kommanderende
paa Konduktør og Stationsforstander.

Da Lokomotivføreren sprang af Maskinen, saa' hans faste Blik, der var
blankt af Taarer, fuldt af Vrede og Fortvivlelse ud over den drukne,
raadløse Skare.




EN KÆRLIGHEDSHISTORIE.


Per i Kælderen kaldtes han af sine mange forskellige Bekendte, som
altid havde et Nik tilovers for ham, naar han med Hænderne i Lommen
stod paa Trappen, der førte ned til hans Beværtning.

Han skinnede af Properhed lige fra Kasketten, der sad langt ned over
den kuglerunde Isse, og til de tykke, hvide Uldstrømper, som stak i
blanke Træsko, saa snart han gik uden for sin Stuedør. Det gjorde han
mange Gange om Dagen for at staa og kige op og ned af sit etetages,
cementforsirede, røde Hus, der laa paa den anden Side af Gaden.

Til alt, hvad der paa nogen Maade stod i Forbindelse med denne hans
Ejendom, nærede Per en uangribelig Kærlighed.

Der var nu de storblomstrede Tapeter, Rosetterne i Lofterne og alle
de smaa Tremmepulterkamre med Hylder og Knagerækker, som han selv
havde gaaet og lempet i Stand; ja -- og saa var der jo Marie, en
lille Pige, hvis Forældre var Pers Lejere, hun var ogsaa Genstand for
de blidere Følelser, som Per virkelig var i Besiddelse af, -- om de
end ikke udtrykte sig særlig tydeligt i hans runde, røde Ansigt med
den gnavne, skæve Mund og de smaa Øjne, der ikke rigtig vilde være
ved, hvor iagttagende de var.

Pers og Maries Sympati var gensidig; den havde en frugtbar Jordbund
at gro i, for Per var -- fra den første Dag Maries Forældre flyttede
ind -- velvillig stemt imod dem; de havde saadan nydelige Gardiner og
Blomsterpotter. Paa den anden Side fandt Familien, at den halvgamle
Ungkarl var en meget behagelig Vært, der var saa langt fra at være
krakilsk, at han næsten var _for_ rar.

Ja, for Per _var_ rar, saa rar, at han ikke nænnede at sige imod,
naar hans Lejere bad ham om noget. Venligt og imødekommende sagde han
ja til ethvert Forlangende, -- men indvendig svor han paa, at saadan
et godt, grundmuret Hus sku' -- fan'eme -- ikke ha' nogen Slavs
Hundekunster med Panel eller saadan noget. --

Det hændte en Dag, at Per vandt Maries Hjærte helt ved at lette paa
Kasketten og raabe: »Goddag, lille Jomfru!« netop som Marie nød den
Ære at følges fra Skole med en ældre Kammerat, der altid pralede af,
at hendes Faders Kontorister tog Hatten af for hende.

Da Marie var kommen hjem, udsøgte hun sit bedste Glansbillede,
tilbragte en halv Times Tid med at pakke det ind, forsegle og skrive
rigtig flot uden paa: Per i Kælderen, Odense, Fyn, Danmark, Evropa;
derpaa gik hun ned og overrakte ham det.

Som Per plejede, naar han var forlegen, tog han Kasketten af og
arrangerede den graa Haardusk, der fra venstre Øre lagdes op over
Issen; men Opvartningsjomfruen, der var rapmundet og vant til at
finde sig til Rette i alle mulige Situationer, sagde:

»De maa da klinke med Frøkenen paa nærmere Bekendtskab, Hansen!«

»Sku' Barnet ha' Spærituosa! Ja, De er -- fan'eme -- hæ -- hva' De
er, Jomfru. -- La's af Ste' etter for -- la' mig se -- ja, tag Du
kuns for 25 Øre af de Toøres.«

Og Lars, den magre Kelneraspirant, rev Døren op, saa det lille røde
Gardin flagrede, og Klokken klingrede vildt; han tog Stentrappen op
til Gaden i et Spring, der var saa tjenstivrigt, at hans Knæ og Hage
kom i nærmeste Berøring. --

Efterhaanden blev Per i Kælderen og hans Territorium et Slags Fristed
for Marie, naar hun trængte til at hyldes efter at have været
tilsidesat i Barnekammeret.

Der regerede hendes femaarige Broder Kaj uindskrænket, protegeret af
Barnepigen, der havde været hans Amme, og som henfaldt i den dybeste
Melankoli og ubehageligste Fornærmelsestilstand, naar højere Magter
tillod sig at gribe ind i det hende underlagte Departements indre
Anliggender. Hun ofrede sig Dag og Nat for sin Kaj, vaagede over ham,
naar han havde lidt Mavepine, og tog ham med paa sin Ferietur ud
til hendes Svogers Gaard, hvor hendes Søn, der nu var Tjenestedreng,
havde tilbragt sin spæde Barndom. Blot Kaj forlangte det, nedlagde
Line øjeblikkelig sin Strikkestrømpe, agerede Hest, »kørte i Futtog«
eller klippede de vidunderligste Rækker af dansende Koner, hvis
stive Arme hængte sammen; -- men Marie, der efter Lines Mening
favoriseredes i Dagligstuen, kunde forgæves tigge hende i Timevis om
den Slags Gunstbevisninger.

Nej -- saa blev Marie rigtignok anderledes behandlet hos Per i
Kælderen!

Var der Gæster, sendte han hende med synlig Overvindelse bort igen,
men ellers blev hun modtaget som en Prinsesse.

»Jomfru, ind og tag Tøjet og Gamasserne af vores Frøken! La's, af
Ste' me' Dig etter Botterdejger.«

Marie følte sig fuldstændig hjemme i den hyggelige Kælderstue; hun
fandt det saa interessant, at de brede, med Blomsterpotter smykkede
Vinduer sad højt oppe, og at der stod firkantede, voksdugsbeklædte
Borde omkring paa det sandstrøede Gulv.

Det var saa morsomt, at det var netop det Bøgebrænde, som Per under
hendes Tilsyn havde kløvet, der blussede og buldrede i den store,
gammeldags Kakkelovn.

Og megen Skæmt havde Per og Barnet for, især da »Gækkeneljerne«
begyndte at komme.

Per forsøgte paa alle mulige underfundige Maader at narre Marie en
Blomst i Hænde; men hun var, som han sagde, »den mest dørkdrevneste
Ra', der ku' gaa paa et Par Ba'ben!«

Dog -- en Dag, da Marie tog sin traditionelle »Snitte«, gik den midt
over, og inde i den laa den famøse Blomst.

Da lo Per, saa hans svære Mave rystede, og Marie lo, Jomfruen
formelig hvinede, og Lars, der fra Bagstuen spændt havde luret
paa, hvorledes Komplottet skulde falde ud, kom styrtende med sit
bevægelige Ansigt trukket ud til de mest forekommende Smil.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Skønt Per og Line ikke var ganske enige i Valget af deres Favoritter,
opstod der dog mellem dem et Slags nærmere Bekendtskab og en vis
hemmelighedsfuld Samfølelse i Anledning af Børnene.

Det begyndte med, at Line en Dag, som hun stor og tyk trampede forbi
Kælderhalsen, hvor Per stod og betragtede sin Ejendom, spurgte:

»Hun er da vel skikkelig, naar hun er nere hos dem, Per Hansen?«

Rigtignok besvarede Per kun denne Antydning af Tvivl om Maries
Ufejlbarlighed med nogle smaa foragtelige Grynt, men ikke desto
mindre blev det til en lille Passiar; den efterfulgtes af adskillige
flere, ja endogsaa af en Indbydelse paa »Sukkela'e« nede i Kælderen,
hvad Line dog ikke mente at kunne modtage.

Men i hendes Reflexioner kom denne Indbydelse til at spille en vis
Rolle; der var noget »rijælt« ved saadan et Tilbud af Traktement.
Hendes Sympati for den belevne Per, som sad der alene med Bedriften,
voksede. --

Da Storken gik i Enge, og Gøgen kukkede i Skoven, og Tiden for Lines,
Kajs og Maries aarlige Landtur indtraf, udvirkede Line hos sit
Herskab, at Per maatte inviteres med. --

Og Per tog med i lys Sommerfrakke og med sin bedagede Følge-Lig-Hat,
-- men i dybeste Hemmelighed, for Prangerne havde saadan »none
visnæsede Kæfter.«

Da det lille Selskab var kommet ud af Toget og travede hen ad
Landevejen til Lines Svogers Gaard, erklærede Marie, at det var den
bedste Tur, de endnu havde havt, og det var, fordi Per var med!

Det satte ham straks i godt Humør. Endnu bedre blev det, da de efter
Kaffen, hvortil han trakterede med umaadelige Masser af Wienerbrød,
gik ud og saa paa Besætningen.

Per var bondefødt, og her i den græsgroede Gaard mellem de lave,
hyggende Længer levede hans Ungdomsfølelser delvist op igen.

Han tog Hatten af, rystede paa Hovedet, lo lidt, vendte sig saa til
Line, -- Svogeren havde demonstrativt ladet dem være ene, -- og sagde
med et Smil og et Suk, der saa udmærket forenedes om hans gnavne Mund:

»Ja, dengang var man ret en lieber Gut!«

Line, der ogsaa paa en Maade var betaget, svarede ud af _sin_
Tankegang:

»Ja, ordentlig, det er her. De sku' se Spisekammerhylderne. -- Vores
Familie har nu alleti'er været te' aa sli'e. Je' kom u' at tjene, da
je' var ti Aar, Per Hansen!«

Per Hansen holdt Begravelseshatten i Haanden og ordnede febrilsk ved
Haardusken. Line fortsatte i en bestemt Tone:

»Vi har nu været store og stærke, mine Foræl're, de var nu osse
saadan te' aa sli'e. Har di'tte givet vos andet i Arvepart, saa har
de givet vos Løst te' Arbe'!«

»Ja, det er sgu Kapital, der ka' flaske sig!« udbrød Per.

»Vi var jo manne Børn, men de er kommen godt deran allesammen, se nu
min Søster her, og én blev sgu Jordemor. -- Det er jo kuns egentlig
mig, der er saadan lidt strandet; men saa længe je' ka' arbe', saa
har je' det godt; det er dog li'egodt det, der holder Humøret oppe.«

Per stod tavs og betragtede opmærksomt Vandtruget. Saa satte han
Hatten paa, slog Hænderne sammen, sparkede lidt ud med det ene Ben og
sagde letsindigt og flot:

»Dø' og Kritte, sikken en Vær'shusholdermadam, der ku' hav' bleven a'
Dem, Line!«

»La' De nu bare vær', Per Hansen, ska' je' te' aa spekkelere, bliver
je' bare krakilsk aa halvtovlig.«

»Gu' gør De ikke nikke nej! De er soli' -- fan'eme -- det har jeg
alti'er sagt. -- -- Men det ka' være maje rigtig, man ska'te si'e
mer, end som man ka' staa ve'; det er der Rasong i.«

Og saa gik Per ind i Kostalden. --

Aftenen kom, og Per, Line og Børnene begav sig efter et solidt
Maaltid paa Vej til Stationen.

Line bar sin Kaj paa Ryggen et langt Stykke; Marie travede af Sted
ved Pers Haand.

Ingen af dem talte.

Alle Lydene fra Gaardene og Markerne dæmpedes mere og mere, indtil
de smeltede sammen med Kvækket af Frøerne i de gyldentblanke Kær,
den svage Surren i Telegrafstængerne, et lille Vandløbs vedholdende,
næsten uhørlige Rislen, et enkelt Pip af en Fugl -- til en sagte,
stilfærdig Musik, der -- Per og Line ubevidst -- lokkede deres træge
Tanker til uvant Svirren og satte deres jævne Følelser i en særegen
Bevægelse. --

Ved en Sidevej, der førte ned til en lille Skov, satte de sig paa
Gærdet.

Kaj blev anbragt paa Lines Sjal, og han og Marie lavede i Tavshed
Livbaand og Kranse af Blade, som de heftede sammen med smaa Pinde.

Pers Mund var usædvanlig skæv, som han sad der og saa' ud i
Solnedgangens Guld og Ild; tilsidst tog han sig helt blændet over
Øjnene. Gav sig saa til at snitte Pinde til Børnene.

Hen ad den haarde Vej lød taktfaste Trin og Hestetrampen.

En ung Karl kom hjem fra Marken med et Par kraftige Arbejdsheste.

»Go' Avten!« hilste han muntert og tog Piben ud af Munden.

Per, der følte sit Ansvar, benyttede Lejligheden til for yderligere
Sikkerheds Skyld at spørge, om han vidste, hvor længe der var, indtil
Toget gik.

»Prr, ka' I sto'!« sagde Karlen og standsede Hestene, tog sit Uhr
frem, lukkede Celluloidkassen op og svarede:

»Stationen er jævne herve', bliv Du kuns sittende me' Mutter og det
unge Danmark en hal' Time te'. I er kanske fra O'ense?«

»Ja, det er vi da.«

Hestene begyndte at gaa. »Ja, Farvel,« hilste Karlen og gik raskt
videre.

Per henfaldt atter i Grublerier.

Efter en lang Tavshed udbrød han melankolsk og stemningsbetaget:

»Saadan gamle Mandfolk, naar vi bliver gamle, saa duer vi sgu'te te'
andet end te' og smi'e paa Møtningen!«

Line svarede:

»Nej, -- I ka' ju'tte saadan rederere jer selv; er det nu nove at
sitte der me' bart Ho'e og forkøle Dem, Per Hansen?«

Og Line rakte ham den høje.

Denne kvindelige Omhu var mere end Per i dette Øjeblik kunde staa
for; den vakte den Længsel efter noget -- ud over Skænkepigens
Stoppen hans Strømper og Reden hans Seng, -- som ikke var helt
udslukt hos den gamle Ungkarl.

Han rømmede sig, tog utallige Gange Hatten af Hovedet og ordnede
sin eneste Haarlok, gned sin røde Kind heftigt, sukkede og slog sig
arrigt over Knæene. Men pludselig sagde han energisk til sig selv:
»Nu holder Du Kæft, Per Hansen, ellers saa gaar den -- fan'eme --
aff!« --

Stemningen var ligesom sunken et Par Grader.

Marie sad og saa tankefuld fra Per til Line.

Kaj forlangte nedladende at føres afsides.

Line sprang ilsomt op.

Da hun kom tilbage, sagde hun:

»Hva' si'er Perpendiklen, Per Hansen? Vi ska' vel af Ste'?«

»Ja, vi maa vel -- for Børnenes Skyld. Aark, hvis det nu var vores,
og vi sku' hjem te' saadan et pænt, grundmuret Hus med Veranda og
Glaskugle midt paa Græsplænen. Aark -- fan'eme,« sukkede Per dybt.

Men Line sagde bestemt:

»Nu ska' De la' vær' og skave Dem, Per Hansen, vil De mig no'et
rijælt, eller vil D'itte? Jeg er for gammel te' at la' mig ta' ve'
Næsen. Ja, jeg er!«

Per saa forbløffet paa hende og gned sig raadvild paa Issen. Men da
sagde Marie:

»Det er ligesom, vi var Far og Mor og Børn! Ikke Kaj. Hvad?«

»Jo,« svarede Kaj afgørende og stak for første Gang frivilligt sin
Haand i Pers.

»Fan'eme!« udbrød han, »jeg givter Dem, Line!«

»Herregu' Per, det ska' Du'te komme te' at fortry'e,« svarede Line og
viskede sig over Øjnene. -- --

Da Per den Aften skulde skilles fra sine Rejsefæller, trak han Line
afsides, gav hende det første Smækkys, slog med Haanden hen efter
Marie og sagde: »Hun er et af de mest klovviseste Børn, _jeg_ har
set. Bare Vorherre ikke ta'er hende.«

Let krænket saa Line efter Kaj og svarede: »Han er nu mer' saadan me'
at tænke indvendig.«

»Ja, der ska' no'en te' det værste, -- Madam Hansen,« lo Per; Line lo
med og gik saa efter Børnene.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hyld og Humle, by Sophie Breum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYLD OG HUMLE ***

***** This file should be named 43290-8.txt or 43290-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/2/9/43290/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Guds Fred, by Peter Nansen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Guds Fred

Author: Peter Nansen

Release Date: July 24, 2013 [EBook #43295]

Language: Danish


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUDS FRED ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)





Afskriverens bemærkninger: Åbenlyse trykfejl er rettet i denne
e-bog, men forfatterens stavning er for øvrigt bevaret.
_Understreg_ er brugt til at gengive kursiveret tekst.




                            PETER NANSEN

                              GUDS FRED

                             ANDET OPLAG

                             KJØBENHAVN

                       P. G. PHILIPSENS FORLAG

            Trykt hos J. Jørgensen & Co. (M. A. Hannover)

                                1895




  En autoriseret tysk Udgave af _Guds Fred_ udkommer,
  samtidig med den danske Udgave, hos _S. Fischer_
  i Berlin.

  Fjerde Tusend.




I.


                                                       _5. Juni._

Saa skal jeg da bort fra Hovedstaden. I femten Aar holdt den mig
fast, den listige Skøge, bildte mig ind, at jeg ikke kunde undvære
dens giftigt parfumerede Luft, dens støjende Lader, dens hidsende
Anspændthed, dens forfinede Magelighed. Jeg sad i et Spind af tusind
Fangetraade, jeg troede, den havde fanget mig for Tid og Evighed.
Jeg troede vel ogsaa saa smaat, at den ikke kunde undvære mig. Var
jeg ikke i Aarenes Løb bleven et fast Led i det store Maskineri?
Ansaas af Alle for at høre med. Var selvskreven Deltager i Byens
broget vekslende Liv, snart festklædt, snart sørgeklædt; gav min
Stemme med i de afgørende Ordskifter, blev spurgt og søgt, var
Raadgiver og Hjælper, en paalidelig Ven, en Fjende, der maatte
regnes med.

Hvor træt jeg ofte har været. Udslidt som en gammel Droskehest, der
maa drives afsted med Piskeslag og som gærne lagde sig plat ned paa
Stenbroen og blev liggende, til Døden og Hvilen kom.

Dødsenstræt er jeg, af Fornøjelser og Arbejde, af altid at være til
Rede, tage Parti, forsvare og angribe; dødsenstræt og i mit Hjærte
saa ligegyldig, mens ingen Slaphed tør røbes i Ord og Væsen.

Allermest træt af den evige Kamp for Penge. Penge, der maatte
og skulde skaffes, slides til Veje, laanes frem, forrentes,
tilbagebetales, altid flere, altid besværligere -- en stedse
voksende Lavine, mere og mere truende, tungere for hver Time at
stemme Ryg imod, hæmmende Arbejdsevnen om Dagen, skræmmende Søvnen
som en Mare.

Hvorfor undre sig over den mer eller mindre aabenbare Støtte,
Socialismen i stigende Grad vinder hos Folk, der ikke hører til
de legemlige Arbejdere? Forklaringen ligger lige for Haanden. Hvad
har de ni af ti blandt os, der rangerer i de øvre Klasser, at tabe
ved en Samfundsomvæltning, en Forandring af de herskende økonomiske
Regler og Love? Vi er, mindst de ni af ti, Proletarer, der kæmper
en haabløs Kamp for at faa de Indtægter, Samfundet under os, til at
holde Maal med de Udgifter, det samme Samfund kræver af os, om vi
ikke vil sættes udenfor Numer. Paa faa Undtagelser nær lever vi alle
over Evne, Embedsmænd og Kunstnere, Videnskabsmænd og Handlende,
Præster, Skuespillere, Oberster, Journalister, Borgmestre og
Poeter. Hvad tabte vi vel, om pludselig den store Eksplosion kom,
Eksplosionen, som sprængte Samfundet løs af alle Fuger og lavede
Fidibusser af Gældsbreve, Veksler og Forskrivninger? _De_ har det
maaske endda forholdsvis bedst, som lever fra Haanden i Munden.
Deres Fordringer til Livet er smaa og der stilles ingen Fordringer
til dem. Hellerikke er det dem, der satte Gang i den Bevægelse, som
fører til Omvæltningen. Det er Mænd fra vor Midte, der lærte dem at
blive Socialister, det er Fortvivlelsen i de højere Klasser, der har
avlet Kravene nede fra.

-- -- Forleden brød jeg overtvært. Overgav mit Bo til en velsindet
Sagfører, ordnede mig med en Forlægger, der nærede en venlig Tillid
til mine Evner og erklærede sig villig til at udbetale mig for et
Aar eller to en beskeden maanedlig Understøttelse, har nu pakket min
Kuffert og indskiber mig i Eftermiddag -- uden Farvel til Nogen --
for at drage til den gamle Provinsby, hvor jeg har levet min første
Barndom; som jeg ikke i tyve Aar har set, men som jeg stadig, naar
Trætheden kom op i mig, har længtes tilbage til.

Jeg har ikke vaklet. I samme Nu, mit Opbrud fra Hovedstaden
besluttedes, i samme Nu vidste jeg, hvor jeg vilde hen. Den gamle By
kalder mig som en Moder, der trofast har siddet og ventet paa sit
vidt omstrejfende Barn. I den gamle By er der intet, som kan minde
mig om det, jeg vil glemme og bort fra. Den og jeg kender hinanden
kun fra de gode Aar, da den var det skønneste og dejligste, jeg
vidste, Genstanden for min Stolthed og Beundring, og da jeg var et
af dens mest forkælede Børn. Den kalder paa mig som en Moder. Thi
dér ligger min Moder begravet. Den rummer al den Moderkærlighed, jeg
i hine Dage nød mere end nogen anden og som jeg mistede saa tidligt.
Hvor i Verden tage hen uden netop til den gamle By? Jeg søger den jo
for at blive Barn igen.




II.


                                                        _Ombord._

Ikke har jeg sovet og ikke vaaget paa Overfarten. Jeg sidder i den
lune lyse Sommernat paa Dækket og lader drømmende Tankerne følge
den gyldne Kølvandsstribe, vugget blidt til Ro af Maskinens tunge
regelmæssige Slag og de hoppende Smaabølgers klukkende Skvulp mod
Skibet.

Tankerne følger Striben tilbage -- til det Liv, den Verden, hvor
jeg nys færdedes. Saa underlig langt jeg allerede føler mig fra det
altsammen, saa fremmed og overlegen overfor det. Hvor ligegyldigt,
tomt og intetsigende det nu synes mig. Og _det_ har jeg ofret femten
af mine bedste Aar. Ingen har været ivrigere end jeg, ingen mere
fanatisk troende. Pur ung meldte jeg mig til mit Partis Fane,
sloges bravt og blindt i de Meniges Rækker, forfremmedes og naaede
vel noget nær de Udmærkelser, min Ærgærrighed kunde begære. Midt i
Kampbulderet har jeg været, har hadet og tilbedt, aldrig svigtet
min Fane-Ed, aldrig følt mig fristet til det, har vundet Venner og
Fjender, gjort Godt og Ondt efter Evne og bedste Skøn.

Og hvad er saa Resultatet blevet? Lykke for mig? Lykke for nogen
Anden? Næppe det sidste; det første afgjort ikke. Naar jeg nu
godvilligt opgiver min tilkæmpede Stilling -- den, vistnok Mange
misunder mig som atraaværdig --, er det i en inderlig Følelse af
dens haabløse Uudholdelighed.

Hvad i Herrens Navn slaas man for? Hvorfor forfølger man hinanden,
mistænker og mishandler hinanden, altid væbnet til Tænderne, altid
parat til at hugge løs? Maaske er der, langt ude i det Fjærne,
et Maal at naa. En højere Retfærdighed, en bedre Fordeling af
Tilværelsens Goder. Maaske oplever vore Børnebørn en ny social
Omvæltning. Men forøvrigt: vil Menneskene føle sig lykkeligere, om
Maalet virkelig naaes, eller vil de ikke blot skynde sig, med Uro i
Hjærterne, i unøjsom Higen, at kæmpe og hade sig frem mod nye Maal?
Sikkert. Nej, det er en tom Indbildning, at Lykken vindes gennem
Kamp. Kun i Fred, Fred med sig selv og Verden, findes Lykken.

At tænke sig, at de stadig slaas derinde. Endnu har den store
By ikke lagt sig til Hvile, endnu summer Ondskaben og Vreden i
elektrisk Belysning gennem Gaderne, stimer sammen paa Kaféerne,
drikker sig ør og sløv, vaagner saa imorgen, efter en angstfuld
Søvn, i hede Hjærner og bitre Hjærter. At de gider! At de ikke
alle en dejlig Sommermorgenstund springer op med den Beslutning,
at nu vil de ikke længer! Smider Vaabnene fra sig, svaler den hede
Hjærne i den friske Morgen, fylder det bitre Hjærte med Naturens
søde Vellyst, renser sig ud for al Ondskab og alt Had, slutter
Fred over hele Linjen paa det simple, letfattelige Grundlag: Vi
er Mennesker alle, vi vil hinanden intet Ondt. Og fuldbyrder,
uden Blodsudgydelse, den Revolution, som gør enhver ny Revolution
overflødig.

-- -- Saadan sidder jeg og drømmer, mens Skibet den skønne Juninat
bærer mig over den stille Sø til min gamle By. Og som var det et
Billed, skabt af min Drøm, ser jeg i Solopgangen, just som vi har
passeret Fjordens Indløb, en ung Kvinde staa ved min Side, stor og
stolt, med et Ansigt, der lyser af mild Fred. Som et Syn kom hun,
som et Syn forsvandt hun. Men var hun et Varselbud, jeg modtager det
med Tak. Et Varsel om, at jeg er styret den rette Kurs for at finde
Freden.




III.


                                    _Vejrbakken, 6. Juni, Aften._

Vi ankom i den aarle Morgenstund. Bagagen lod jeg foreløbig staa
ombord -- jeg vidste endnu ikke, hvor jeg vilde bo. Og jeg drev
op gennem den slumrende By. Straks var jeg lidt vildsom til
Mode. Den Gade, jeg gik i, havde et Navn, jeg ikke mindedes, og
mange nye Huse med flove glatte Allemands-Façader og hjærteløse
Spejlglas-Butiksruder.

Men da jeg kom ud paa Torvet, kendte jeg min gamle By.

Jeg satte mig paa den fritstaaende Stentrappe foran det Hus, hvor
jeg som Barn havde boet; jeg lukkede Øjnene over det hastigt
gensete Billede, og saa livagtigt, som havde jeg nys forladt
det, opstod Torvet i min Erindring, saadant som det var i mine
Barndomsdage.

For Enden af Torvet løber Østeraa. Den er ikke overdækket --
som nu --, den flyder aaben gennem Byen, med Broer over og med
knudrede løvrige Træer paa begge Sider. Og den er fuld af Baade og
smaa Skuder, hvor der sælges Fisk og Jydepotter og Træsko og, om
Efteraaret, Frugt. Saa dufter hele Torvet, ja Gaderne udenom med, af
krydrede Bergamotter og Gravensteners Rosen-Em.

Den anden Ende af Torvet beherskes af det gulstrøgne Kongehus med
den takkede Gavl. Her er det, at Byens gamle Storkefædre holder
Forsamling Sommereftermiddage. De staar én paa hver af Gavlens
Afsatser, øverst oppe Præsidenten, der aabner Mødet med en høj
Knebren. Derefter knebrer de paa Rad, alle de ærværdige Storke, og
de, der lytter til, staar undertiden paa ét Ben af lutter Iver. Men
det hænder, at Raadsforsamlingen opløses i almindeligt Klammeri,
mens alle Storkene basker med Vingerne og knebrer forbitret i Munden
paa hinanden. Ogsaa hænder det, at en nidkær Storkemadam eller en
næsvis Storkepode forsøger at trænge sig ind i Forsamlingen og
bliver sat paa Porten under drøje Knubs, saa Fjerene ryger om den.

Det gamle Kongehus, hvilken Sorg den Dag det dømmes til Døden af et
pietetsløst Borgervels Krav paa en ny tidssvarende Bankbygning. De
skændige Rænker, de giftige Løgne, der føres i Marken for at fælde
det.

Det insinueres, at alle de historiske Overleveringer, som giver
Kongehuset Ry og Glans gennem Aarhundreder, er tyvstjaalen Pynt.
Det paastaas ydermere, at Huset er saa medtaget af Ælde, at det
næppe kan holde sig oprejst og at det er en stadig truende Fare for
de omliggende Bygninger. En rasende Kamp føres i Byraad og i den
stedlige Presse mellem Ideens Talsmand -- Latinskolens Historielærer
-- og Borgervellets Materialister. Men disse sidste sejrer, efterat
et Velfærdsudvalg af bankforhippede Haandværkere har givet
sagkyndigt Skøn for Kongehusets Affældighed. Og Nedbrydningen
begynder. Vi Børn, hvis fædrelandske Fantasi er vokset op i Skyggen
af det gamle Hus, følger med forbitret Sorg hvert Slag af Hakken,
og vi nyder en smerteblandet Triumf, da Haandværkerne midt under
Arbejdet maa erklære sig magtesløse og tage Krudtet til Hjælp for
at sprænge Kongehusets favntykke Mure. Saa falder omsider den gamle
Kæmpe, men ej for Menneskehaand. Døende spotter den sine Voldsmænd.

Midt paa Torvet ligger det røde Raadhus med Byens Vaaben i Guld og
Farver over den svære brune Egetræsdør. Om Raadhuset samler sig
alle Barnestue-Historiernes Uhygge. Foran det stod i gamle Dage
Gabestokken og Pælen, hvortil Forbryderne bandtes, naar de offenligt
piskedes. Her udsonede bl. a. de berygtede Røvere fra de store Skove
Nord for Fjorden Begyndelsen af deres Straf, da de langt om længe,
efter talløse Skændselsgærninger, fangedes af Militæret og Omegnens
Bønder. Banden bestod af en gammel Kælling, hendes syv ryggesløse
Sønner og en vidunderskøn ung Pige, Kæreste til den ældste af
Brødrene, Erik Krumfinger. Plyndring, Voldtægt og Ildebrand var de
mindste af deres Forbrydelser. Ogsaa adskillige Mord havde de paa
deres Samvittighed og Grusomheder af den skrækkeligste Art. Saaledes
-- fortalte ialfald min Barnepige -- morede de sig med at binde
smaa Børn til gloende Ovne, naar de forlod en Bondegaard efterat
have plyndret den og myrdet de voksne Beboere. Det var en Fest for
hele Byen og Omegnen, da de, nøgne til Bæltestedet, piskedes foran
Raadhuset og Morgenen efter førtes til Galgebakken og henrettedes.
Kun Erik Krumfingers Kæreste vakte en vis Medlidenhed. Hun var saa
dejlig af Skikkelse og Aasyn, hun var saa ung og hun jamrede sig saa
bitterligt, da hun blev pisket. Men om Skaansel kunde der ikke være
Tale. Hun havde været den allergrummeste til at stege de smaa Børn.

Rundt om Torvet ligger saa alle de gamle Købmands- og
Beværtningsgaarde, hvor Bønderne tager ind Torvedagene og hvor der
er den herligste Tumleplads for Børnenes Lege. Bindingværks-Gaarde,
der er et sandt Vildnis af Svalegange med tørrede Sild paa udspændte
Snore, af vaklende Trapper og møre Ud- og Tilbygninger, der raver
mellem hinanden som fulde Mænd. Her paa Lofterne i de store
Korndynger leges der Skjul, og om Lørdagen sidder jeg bag Disken i
den holstenske Madams Værtshuskælder og skænker hvidt Øl og Dram
for Bønderne og min Ven Droskekusken, som bor i et Hul bag Stalden
i Porten og dér, i en altid frisk Atmosfære af Hestegødning, med
et Spritkogeapparat, en Rugbrødshumpel, en Krukke Svinefedt og en
Billing Kommensost fører den lykkeligste Ungkarle-Husholdning, jeg
kan tænke mig. Men naar Stemningen bliver høj i den lave Kælder,
morer man sig med at give den aldrende Droskehest Brød, dyppet
i Brændevin, og som en vild Araber farer Øget rundt om Torvet,
bredende Skræk og Forfærdelse mellem Bønderkonerne, der sidder
med udbredte Skørter foran Raadhustrappen og i landlig Ugenérthed
besørger deres Privatanliggender.

-- -- -- Jeg aabner Øjnene og ser ud over det sollyse Torv.
Raadhuset ligger der endnu, de gamle Gaarde ogsaa, jeg ser
Værtshuskælderens smaa grønne Ruder, jeg øjner en Stump af Aaen,
der bugter sig mellem hældende Huse og over hvis lemlæstede Poesi
et enkelt Syrentræ i en tilstødende Have breder et ungt blomstrende
Smil -- -- jeg kender min gamle By og jeg rejser mig, let og glad i
Sindet, med en dirrende Lykkefornemmelse af at være hjemme.

Jeg er hjemme, og jeg vil til min Moders Grav.

       *       *       *       *       *

Endnu er Byen ikke vaagnet. Mens jeg vandrer gennem dens tomme
Gader, fornemmer jeg det, som om jeg er kommen og har overrasket
den, og jeg sender vækkende Gensynshilsener til alle de kendte Ting,
jeg møder. Herregud, her hænger det endnu nedad Kirketaarnet, det
tykke Tov, som var den gamle Bys ukunstlede Brandsignal-Apparat.
Den, der opdagede en Brand, havde at trække i Tovet, saa Klokken
i Taarnet klemtede. Mellem os Børn hed det sig, at den Lykkelige,
der saaledes meldte en Brand, fik udbetalt en blank Rigsdaler. Hvor
flittigt -- men forgæves -- spejdede jeg ikke paa hver Spadseretur
efter at se Luerne slaa ud af et Hus. Jeg vandt aldrig Daleren.
Monstro det gamle Tov endnu gør Tjeneste, eller hænger det mon blot
som en forglemt Levning fra svundne Dage?

Jeg standser og ser ned ad en skraanende Side-Gade. I det
fremspringende Hjørne-Hus dernede var det jo, vi boede i Krigens
Aar. Jeg var ikke mere end et Par Aar den Gang, og dog præntede
hine Dages Begivenheder uudslettelige Indtryk i min Sjæl. Den
tyske Indkvartering -- Soldaterne, der skændtes med Moder om den
danske Mad, og den gemytlige hvidskæggede Major Brumbasse, der
forelskede sig i os Børn, men som jeg ikke vilde lade kysse mig,
fordi han var en Tysker. Allermest dog disse Billeder: Min Moder
og mine halvvoksne Søstre samt et Par andre af Byens Smaapiger
sidder og piller Charpi. Pludselig lyder der Hestetramp i Gaden,
jeg skynder mig til Vinduet, men i det samme gaar Døren til Faders
Studereværelse op, og med et kraftigt Ryk rives jeg bort fra
Vinduet. »Rul Gardinerne ned, Ingen maa se ud,« -- siger Fader, bleg
og bevæget. »Tyskerne kommer!« En uhyggesvanger Stilhed hersker i
den mørke Stue, og bange kryber jeg sammen i Moders Skørter, mens
den klaprende Larm af mange Heste kommer nærmere. Saa standser
Støjen lige nedenfor vore Vinduer, vi hører kun nogle hastige høje
Ord, der lyder som Skældsord, en Klynken, nye Eder, Forbandelser,
Raslen af Sabler, urolig Stampen af Heste og, tilsidst, et
angstfuldt Skrig paa Dansk. Sit eget Forbud til Trods iler Fader
til Vinduet, Moder og vi Børn bag ham, og fra en Stol ser jeg en
Mand, i hvem jeg kender vor Skomager, blive slæbt af en Officer i
skinnende hvid Kappe henad Stenbroen, langs den stejlende Hest. Og
jeg ser Gaden fuld af fint uniformerede Ryttere, der nu alle igen
sætter sig i Bevægelse, efter Officeren, der, med Skomageren som
tvungen Vejviser, fører an ned mod Fjorden, over hvilken de danske
Soldater er flygtede.

Og saa Billedet af de saarede danske Soldater, der køres gennem
Gaderne, efter den ulykkelige Træfning ved Bakkerne Vest for Byen.
Saa sikkert var Sejren ventet, thi for en Gangs Skyld var Danskerne
de fleste. Desværre havde Obersten, der førte vor Afdeling, ogsaa
været for tillidsfuld. I Stormløb lod han sine Folk tage Terrænet
ned ad Bakkerne, ved hvis Fod Tyskerne ventede i Ly bag Grøftehegn.
Og fra den dækkede Stilling strakte Tyskernes Geværkugler de
fremstormende Danskere til Jorden som værgeløst Vildt. Herom
havde vi Børn hørt, ogsaa om Oberstens Fortvivlelse -- han var
indkvarteret hos en Embedsmandsfamilje, som stod os nær, og det var
fortalt Fader, hvordan Obersten, der om Morgenen red sejrssikker ud
for at oplede Tyskerne, sent om Aftenen var vendt tilbage og havde
lukket sig inde paa sine Værelser, uden at ville spise og uden at
ville tale med Nogen. Nu, den næste Morgen, kom de Saaredes Træn.
Langsomt og tungt, som et Ligtog, ruller Vognene gennem Gaden, og
paa spredte Halmneg hviler de Saarede. Nogle har Bind om Hovedet,
andre om Arme eller Ben. Bindene er plettede af Blod og Ansigterne
er hvidere end Bindene. Ikke en af de Saarede ser til Vinduerne,
alle stirrer de frem for sig med udslukte, haabløse Blikke.
Jeg havde vel næppe nogen saadan Tanke den Gang: det har siden
staaet for mig, som om disse saarede danske Soldater mindre vakte
Medlidenhed ved deres legemlige Smerter end ved den Fortvivlelse
-- ja, Skamfølelse -- over Nederlaget, der stod at læse i deres
forpinte Ansigter.

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Jeg gaar uden at tænke paa den Vej, jeg følger. Det er tyve
Aar siden, jeg traadte disse Gader, deres Navne har jeg i tyve Aar
ikke haft i mine Tanker: som ved en usynlig Haand, uden Eftertanke,
uden Famlen, føres jeg nøjagtigt derhen, jeg vil. Jeg er i mit
Barndomshjem, jeg er i min Faders Hus; min Fod farer ikke vild paa
den hjemlige Grund.

Saa staar jeg, just som Hanen galer tredie Gang sin Morgenhilsen
over Byen, i den lille Gade, som leder ned til Kirkegaarden. De
lave straatækte gule Huse, hvor de gamle Kransebindersker boede,
indrammer endnu Gaden, og som for tyve Aar siden hænger endnu
-- som var det de samme -- tarvelige Vedbendkranse og Moskranse
med Evighedsblomster udenom de smaa Døre med Klinkelaase. I et
af Husene staar et Vindu aabent, og, hidkaldt ved Lyden af den
tidlige Morgenvandrer, stikker en Morlille Hovedet ud. Jeg køber
hendes Kranse, lægger den beskedne Betaling i hendes rynkede Haand,
og, fulgt af hendes Velsignelse, gaar jeg gennem Laagen ind paa
Kirkegaarden, hvor Fuglekvidder og Duft af Cypresser og morgenfriske
Blomster modtager mig.

Min Moders Grav ligger borte fra den alfare Vej, i en stille fjærn
Krog blandt Hundreder af andre Grave. Den usynlige Haand leder mig
ad de halvtilvoksede Stier, der snor sig mellem Græstuerne, og
saa staar jeg med ét foran den lille indhegnede Plet, hvor Moder
hviler, med et Barn ved hver Side: en større Tue mellem to ganske
smaa. Frisk Vedbend dækker alle Gravene og snor sig op om det
simple Marmorkors paa Moders Grav. Bag den, bøjende deres tunge
lilla og gyldne Blomsterklaser ned over den, staar en Guldregn
og et Syrentræ, og i hvert af det lille Kirkegaardsbeds fire
Hjørner folder Rosentræer deres lyserøde og hvide Knopper ud med
Morgensolens Smil gennem Regntaarerne fra Natten.

Jeg sætter mig paa den grønne Tremmebænk, jeg kærtegner med Blikket
Navnet paa Korset ligeoverfor og jeg taler med min Moder.

»Jeg er kommen til Dig, Moder, for at finde Fred. I tyve Aar har jeg
været borte fra Dig, langt, langt borte blandt fremmede Mennesker.
Da jeg sidst sad her og tog Afsked med Dig, vidste jeg ikke, hvad
jeg mistede. Jeg var et Barn og Du en ung Hustru. Nu er Du en klog
gammel Kone, og jeg en dagtræt Mand med Haar, der begynder at
graane. Skænk mig den Fred, Du forlængst har vundet, og jeg bliver
hos Dig.«

Jeg synes min Moder sidder overfor mig, en gammel Kone med hvidt
Haar og milde brune Øjne. Jeg glemmer Tiden, mens jeg ser ind i de
Øjne, til jeg vækkes ved, at Kirkeklokken sender syv skingre Slag
ind over Kirkegaarden. Jeg tager Kransene, dem jeg stadig bærer paa
Armen, og lægger dem, knælende, paa Graven. »Tak, Moder. Tak for
alt -- i gamle Dage og nu.«

Men mit Hjærte rummer ogsaa en anden Tak, mens jeg langsomt, omsust
af Fuglekvidder og Vindens Leg i Trækronerne, forlader den stille,
sødt duftende Dødens Have. En Tak til den gamle Bys Trofasthed, der
ikke har ladet min Moders Grav ligge øde, men har fredet og hæget
om den. Findes vel saadan lang Hukommelse og bestandig Troskab i de
store Stæder, hvor hver Dags Nyt jager støjende frem og puffer alt
forbigangent til Side? Dér mindes man kun Døden i pralende Opraab i
Avisernes Avertissementsspalter. Dér er Kirkegaardene altfor store
og altfor langt borte. De Døde faar skøtte sig selv. Den gamle By
har de Døde i sin Midte, altid nærværende, levende i en kærlig
Hukommelse. Jeg takker Jer, min Moders Venner i den gamle By, jeg
kender Jer ikke længer, jeg bringer Jer mit Hjærtes stille Tak.

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Jeg ender min Morgenvandring paa Vejrbakken, og dér bliver
jeg.

Vejrbakken ligger lige udenfor den gamle By, er dens Lystanlæg,
dens Stolthed. Sjældent fandt ogsaa en By saa herlig en Plet til
en offenlig Park. En gavmild Borger »anlagde« og beplantede for et
Aarhundred siden Vejrbakken, delte den ved Trapper og Vindelalléer
i Terrasser, skærmede den med Gran og Fyr og lod i Ly deraf Bøge og
Sirbuske vokse op, tog Magten fra Vestenvinden og lod Solen herske,
skabte saaledes af den golde Vejr-Bakke en frugtbar Have. Herop
drager den gamle Bys Beboere Sommer-Eftermiddage med Madkurve og
Flaskefoder, faar Vand paa Maskine fra Pavillonen paa den første
Terrasse og gør sig det hyggeligt i Lysthusene. Men paa Terrasserne
ovenfor, i »Skoven«, gaar Drengenes Røverleg.

Jeg kommer til Vejrbakken med en hemmelig Angst for at blive
skuffet. For min Erindring fra Barneaarene staar den som noget rent
æventyragtig stort og skønt. Bakken et Bjærg, Skoven en Urskov.

Jeg ser med et Smil Storagtigheden forsvunden. Baade Bakke og Træer
synes mig at være voksede nedad. Der er intet æventyrligt, intet
fantastisk ved Vejrbakken. Men dens Skønhed er paalidelig nok. En
yndigt smilende Idyl. Alligevel mangler Vejrbakken ikke Storhed. Den
har sin Udsigt.

Jeg er naaet op til »Pavillonen«, en gul Trævilla, udenfor hvilken
en Opvarter og en Hærskare af Spurve er ifærd med at rense de
smaa Beværtningsborde for Madkurvenes Affald. Jeg vender mig om
og blændes. For min Fod har jeg hele Byen og bag den Fjorden, der
bugter sig som en spejlklar Flod mellem Bakker og Enge. Milevidt
naaer Blikket til begge Sider. En Uendelighed af Himmel, Vand
og sommerfrodigt dansk Land. Og Byen, hvis røde Tage synes som
rutschede ned ad Vejrbakkens grønne Skraaninger.

Her har jeg hele min gamle By. Og i samme Nu føler jeg, at her maa
jeg bo. Jeg lader Opvarteren kalde paa Værten, og fem Minutter efter
er jeg indkvarteret i Pavillonens to Kvistværelser, som ellers ikke
udlejes, -- Pavillonen har overhovedet ikke liggende Gæster -- men
som overlades mig, da jeg tilbyder at leje dem for Vinteren med.

Og nu har jeg mit fremtidige Hjem i Orden. Her er ingen Luksus, men
alt hvad jeg behøver: en god Seng i Soveværelset og i min Dagligstue
et Arbejdsbord, nogle Stole -- ja ovenikøbet en Sofa.

Mine Bøger er pakkede ud, mine Piber stoppede. Siden jeg var ung
Student, har jeg ikke smagt Pibe.

Gud være med Jer, Havannacigarer og Cigaretter -- hvad er I dog mod
de Drag af uforfalsket hollandsk Knaster, som jeg i dette Øjeblik
ryger, mens jeg sidder ved mit Kvistvindue og skuer ud over min
gamle By!




IV.


                                                      _12. Juni._

Øverst oppe paa Vejrbakken, ovenover Skoven, paa den aabne Bakkekam
knejser Møllen, hvid med sorte Vinger, paa sin grønne Jordvold. Det
er den bedste Mølle i Egnen, thi den har altid Vind nok. Den tjener
tillige som Sømærke for Skibene paa Fjorden. Den ses i flere Miles
Afstand.

Mølleren ejer Jorden oppe paa Bakken saa langt ned, til Anlægget
begynder. Skrænten mod Nord, mod Fjorden, ligger øde og udyrket. Men
paa Skraaningen mod Syd er et stort Stykke indhegnet og opdyrket til
Have. Mølleren har taget Lære af den Mand, der anlagde Lystanlægget.
Han har trodset Vind og Vejr, har rejst en skærmende Hæk mod Vest,
har blandet Bakkens sandede Jord med møjsommelig tilkørt fed Muld
fra Agerlandet, har gødet og vandet, grøftet og gravet, indtil han
saa' sin hængende Have trives og blomstre.

Jeg mindes den halvt uvillige Respekt, hvormed Mølleren omtaltes
af Byens Folk. Man beundrede hans Dygtighed, men frastødtes af
hans brydske Særlinge-Væsen. Det stod i hans Kontrakt med Byen, af
hvem han købte sin Grund, at den til enhver Tid skulde staa aaben
for Folk, der vilde nyde Udsigten. Men skønt han ikke gjorde noget
Forsøg paa at omgaa denne Kontrakt, følte Byens Beboere sig ikke vel
paa hans Enemærker. I hvert Fald holdt man sig i ærbødig Afstand
fra hans Hus og hans Have. Selv vi Drenge, der nødigt gik af Vejen
for et Vikingetogt ind i en Frugthave, lod om Efteraaret Møllerens
berømte Pærer og Æbler modnes i Fred. Der gik ogsaa ganske ondartede
Rygter om Mølleren. Det fortaltes saaledes, at han behandlede sin
unge smukke Kone, en Proprietærdatter fra en Egn sydpaa, med
tyrannisk Haardhed. Maaske Rygterne blot kom af, at Møllerens Kone
levede lige saa afsondret og indesluttet som han selv -- noget,
den gæstevenlige og selskabelige Befolkning vanskeligt opfattede
som frivilligt --; blidere blev ialfald Rygterne ikke, da den unge
Kone døde faa Maaneder efter sin første Barselseng, efterladende
sin Mand en lille Datter, som hverken fik Amme eller Barnepige, men
passedes af Mølleren selv og hans Svend. Den lille Pige, Genstand
for hele Byens Beklagelse, var vel en 2-3 Aar, da vi rejste bort.
Med sky Nysgærrighed havde jeg ofte betragtet hende, naar hun i sin
Barnevogn -- en simpel Trækasse paa fire Hjul -- blev rullet af den
gamle skutryggede Svend rundt paa Møllevolden.

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Jeg har hver Dag været en Tur oppe ved Møllen. Vi har haft
Vestenstorm. Jeg har nydt det storartede Skue af Fjorden i Oprør, og
jeg har, da Stormen løjede af, lyttet til det fjærne Tordendrøn fra
Vest: Dønningerne fra Havet fem Mil borte.

Jeg fandt Møllen paa sin Plads; men til min Forbavselse stod
Vingerne stille. Jeg tænkte: »Mølleren maa have forandret sig meget
paa sine gamle Dage. Han kan nok ikke længer lide at lade Møllen
gaa i Storm.« Men ogsaa idag, da det er Magsvejr og kun blæser
en almindelig skikkelig Vind oppe over Skoven, hvilede Møllen i
urokkelig Ligegyldighed. Vinden ruskede i de rebede Sejl, den muntre
Bygesol legede gennem Vingernes Ribber. Men Møllen lod sig ikke
vække. Og det allervidunderligste: støttet op mod en af Vingerne,
saa trygt dvælende som kunde der slet ingen Fare tænkes, stod en ung
Kvinde i en tætsluttende blaa Lærreds Kjole, med Armene korslagte
over det høje Bryst, og stirrede ud over det vide Land. Hun hørte
mig ikke, saa' mig ikke. Hun syntes, lig en Tornerose, at drømme ved
Foden af den sovende Mølle.

Skulde Mølleren være død? Og ingen Efterfølger have taget Møllen og
Arbejdet i Arv?

Da jeg for lidt siden kom hjem, spurgte jeg i Forbigaaende min Vært,
om den gamle Møller endnu boede deroppe. Jo, det gjorde han.




V.


                                                      _19. Juni._

Hver Dag gaar jeg lange Ture i Byen og gennemstrejfer den paa
Kryds og Tværs. For hvert Skridt vaagner en Erindring. Jeg
føler mig som en Opdagelsesrejsende i min egen Sjæl: der bygger
sig, Sten paa Sten, op i mig et Kongerige af gode Minder, jeg i
mange Aar har ladet falde i Ruiner. Den gamle By med Barndommens
Søndagsstemning bliver levende i mig, og den befolkes med et Mylr
af kære Skikkelser. Nogle af dem træffer jeg endnu spadserende om i
Gaderne. Gamle Adjunkter, allerede gamle den Gang, jeg var blandt
deres Elever, vandrende samme sindige eller skyndsomt trippende
Gang til Skolen; ærværdige Borgermænd, hvis smilende gæstfri
Ansigter jeg mindes fra deres Sønners Børneselskaber, og unge
travle Forretningsfolk, af hvis alvorsfulde Familjeforsørger-Miner
jeg pludselig ser en gammel forglemt Legekammerats Barnetræk kigge
frem. Jeg gaar som Harun al Raschid i Bagdads Gader. Iagttagende,
genkendende uden selv at blive hverken kendt eller iagttaget. Kun en
Gang imellem møder jeg et skottende, prøvende Blik, der siger: Naa,
der er nok kommen en Fremmed til Byen.

Der er andre Skikkelser, som stiger frem for mig, mens jeg studerer
Butikskiltenes Navne. Det forekommer mig, naar jeg finder de samme
Butiker og samme Købmands-, Bager- og Haandværker-Navne paa samme
Plads, jeg sidst saa' dem, som om den gamle By havde standset sit
Liv og sin Udvikling den Dag, vi forlod den. Jeg maa ræsonnere for
mig selv: »det er jo dog kun tyve Aar siden.« Thi jeg føler mig som
en gammel, gammel Mand, der efter at have levet mange Menneskealdre
i Troldenes Høj, vender tilbage til min Hjemstavn. Jeg kan egenlig
slet ikke forstaa, at ikke alt er forandret og at ikke alle de
Mennesker, jeg kendte, er døde.

Mange af dem er det dog. Om nogle véd jeg det af Beretning, om andre
slutter jeg det, fordi jeg ikke finder dem i deres vante Krog. Ogsaa
disse Skikkelser lever op for mig af den Stenbro, de før traadte og
som jeg nu træder uden at møde dem.

Allertydeligst ser jeg for mig den Frøken, som holdt Skole for bedre
Folks Smaadrenge i den gamle By. Det tykke rare gamle Menneske, til
hvem Mødrene saa trygt betroede deres Poder, thi hun tog sig dem an
ikke blot som Skolemesterinde, men noksaa meget som en Barnepige og
Kæletante. Hende var det, der med sine buttede Fingre hjalp os af
med vore Mælketænder, naar de begyndte at rokke; til hende blev vi
sendt de Dage, hvor vore Forældre formedelst et Storkebesøg eller
andre forstyrrende Familjeanliggender vilde være af med os. Hun
forærede os de første Komediebilletter, og, naar vi betalte vore
fire Mark i Skolepenge hver Maanedsdag, gav hun dem af os, hvis
Forældre sad i smaa Kaar, de to tilbage som en Foræring til at købe
»noget nyttigt« for. Hende endelig var det, der til Fornøjelse for
os Drenge laa og svedte i Sengen Fastelavns-Mandag til langt op paa
Dagen, for at vi alle kunde naa at rise hende op og blive belønnede
med de Boller, hun i en stor Torvekurv havde staaende under Sengen.

Du gode, gamle Pige, i dit store Hjærte bankede al den gamle Bys
barnlige Troskyldighed. Jeg rejser Dig et Æres-Minde, det, dine
Drenge altfor længe har skyldt Dig.




VI.


                                                      _20. Juni._

Naturligvis er den unge Kvinde, jeg saa' oppe paa Møllen forleden,
Møllerens Datter. Jeg Dumrian, som ikke straks begreb det. Hun maa
jo nu være en forlængst voksen Pige.

Jeg kan ikke faa hende ud af mine Tanker. Saa stolt hun stod dér,
højtsvævende, vidtskuende, ovenover Byen og Skoven, ja ovenover
selve Vejrbakken. Hvilke Drømme svulmede mon i hendes Barm, hvilke
Længsler var det mon, som hendes korslagte Arme knugede tilbage?
Saa' hun fra sit høje Bo med Foragt ned paa Menneskenes jordbundne
Stræben, eller gik hendes Hu mod at stige ned og være med i den
travle Færden?

Helst tænker jeg mig hende som den store Freds Gudinde, den
Gudinde, jeg dyrker. Her paa Vejrbakken er hendes Tempel rejst,
og af Møllen bygger jeg hende et Højalter. Herop kalder hun til
livsalig Fred i Naturens ubesmittede Rige den, som mødig søger bort
fra Hverdagslivets Støv og Møje. Hendes Skød har Engens duftende
Kløverhvile for den trætte Vandrers Hoved, hendes Øje spejler
Himlens Blaa og hendes Stemme synger Vindens hviskende Vuggesang i
Træernes Kroner.

Er jeg en Nar, Du smukke Møllerdatter, at jeg fæster Digtningens
Glorie om din Pande, kaarer Dig til min Lykkedrøms Gudinde? Er
Du maaske en ganske jævn lille Borgerpige, der skikkeligt længes
mod Kæreste, Lysning og Brudeseng? Har Du maaske allerede fundet
din Møllersvend? Var det ham, Du spejdede efter, da Du stod paa
Højalteret?

Ligemeget: jeg lader Dig staa, som min Drøm har stillet Dig.
Jeg kender Dig ikke og vil ikke lære Dig at kende. Ingen brutal
Virkelighed skal skænde dit hellige Billed.




VII.


                                                      _25. Juni._

Jeg fik idag gennem min Forlægger Post fra Hovedstaden. En Bunke
ligegyldige Breve, et Brev ogsaa fra min Elskerinde.

Hun spørger forundret, krænket og bedrøvet, om jeg er sunken i
Jorden. Hun har forgæves ventet og søgt mig. Af en fælles Bekendt
har hun saa hørt Rygtet om, at jeg skulde være rejst til Udlandet
med en Dame. Og hun sender mig nu sit Brev paa Maa og Faa, efter
min gamle Adresse: »Jeg véd jo ikke, om det naaer Dig. Dog syntes
jeg, jeg paa en eller anden Maade maatte spørge Dig, hvorvidt Rygtet
taler sandt. Jeg maa jo næsten tro det. Men har jeg da fortjent, at
Du handler saadan mod mig? Har jeg nogensinde forbrudt mig? Har jeg
ikke altid tværtimod føjet Dig i ét og alt, gjort mig Umage for at
være netop saadan som Du vilde have mig; ikke plaget Dig hverken med
Overhæng eller Skinsyge? Nu, Du har tilføjet mig saa bitter en Sorg,
vilde jeg ønske, jeg kunde hade Dig. Jeg kan det ikke. Skriv blot to
Ord, at Du vil komme snart tilbage til mig, og jeg elsker Dig nu som
altid.«

Hun kan ikke hade mig, hun bilder sig ind, hun elsker mig. Jeg tror
ikke paa, at Kærlighed og Had er hinandens nødvendige Supplementer.
Jeg føler mig tværtimod overbevist om, at den største Kærlighed
aldrig, hvor forsmædeligt den end martres, slaar om i Hadets
Modsætning. Men _hun_, der sender mig dette Turteldue-Brev, er
kun Due, forsaavidt som hun forstaar at kurre elskovssygt, kan
ingensinde blive en Høg, thi hun mangler den Følelsens Fanatisme,
der hvæsser Klør og Næb. Hun valgte mig til Elsker, fordi det
behagede hendes Forfængelighed at blive foretrukken af mig. Hun
føler en vis Tomhed nu, jeg er borte. Hun ønsker at faa mig
tilbage; thi det krænker hende, at jeg af egen Drift er gaaet fra
hende. Men om føje Tid vil den Lykke, hun begærer, atter blomstre
for hende. Den tomme Plads vil blive optagen af en ny Elsker, der
har om end andre saa ligesaa store Fortrin som jeg. Hendes Nag imod
mig vil svinde, og naar vi ad Aare atter ses, vil vi hilse fornøjet
paa hinanden som to Venner, der aldrig har haft noget Livsens Alvor
sammen, næppe nok nogen minde- eller glemselværdig Oplevelse.

Det er Sagen. Og det er Forklaringen af, at jeg kunde rejse bort
uden at føle det som en Nødvendighed at tage Afsked med hende. Her
var ikke Tale om et Brud. Hvad skulde jeg sagt hende andet end
et valent »Tak for denne Gang«? Her var end ingen Knude at hugge
over, kun en løst sammenhæftet Kotillonssløjfe at skille i sine to
Baand, det hvide og det røde. Jeg kunde ikke overvinde mig til at
sige de behørige sløve Trøstens- og Takkeord ved denne Skin-Grav.
Jeg skammede mig ved at spille med i en Scene af saa aabenlys
Uvederhæftighed, at give Repliken til hende, der sikkert ikke havde
nægtet sig den Fornøjelse at forsøge sig i det store Drama efter de
bedste Mønstre.

Naar jeg besluttede at bryde op fra Hovedstaden, var maaske
ogsaa, dybest inde, det den stærkeste Bevæggrund, at jeg vilde
bort ikke just fra hende, min sidste Elskerinde, men fra hele den
Elskovs-Sport, som leges i den store Bys Overflade-Selskab og som
jeg med saamegen Iver havde dyrket. Havde dyrket mest fordi jeg
derved tilfredsstillede en Lyst til at haane Kærligheden, til at
rive den ned fra det svimlende høje Fodstykke, som min Ungdoms
blinde Tro byggede den med det Resultat, at jeg selv en skønne Dag
laa værkbruden paa Jorden.

Jeg havde elsket og var blevet skuffet. Jeg tvang min Sorg i mig,
jeg svor en stille Ed, at for første og sidste Gang havde jeg været
Kærlighedens Nar. Var jeg bleven erobret, vilde jeg nu erobre.
Havde man leget med mig, vilde jeg nu lege med andre. Ikke havde
jeg nogen Lyst til at gøre ondt, som der var gjort mig ondt. Jeg
vilde blot tage Kærligheden ovenfra, saadan som den en Gang havde
taget mig i Nakken. Og jeg vilde lære andre at gøre det. Lære dem,
at Kærlighed ikke er værd at regnes for andet end en Spas. Mindst
af alt noget at sætte Livet ind paa. Jeg lærte, at i Kærlighed
sætter man altid Livet ind, ogsaa naar man netop ikke vil det. Jeg
følte mit Liv forspildes, mens jeg troede mig ifærd med at gøre mig
til Kærlighedens Herre. Jeg vaagnede en Morgen i Angst: Se, Aarene
svinder. Hvor er de henne alle de, Du legede med? Hvad har Du samlet
i Lade af de Følelser, Du saaede ud for Vejr og Vind? Draabevis lod
Du dit Hjærte forbløde og lægge sig øde, gav lidet og fik intet, gav
saa ofte, at Du snart intet vil have tilbage.

Jeg vil svare min fortørnede Elskerinde: Jeg ønsker Dig, der var min
altfor lærvillige Elev, at Du en Gang maa træffe En, der lærer Dig
at elske.

Maaske vil jeg da ialfald lære hende at hade.

Thi dum er hun ikke.




VIII.


                                            _Sidste Dage i Juni._

Jeg vil skrive en Bog om den gamle By. Ikke som den er -- jeg bryder
mig sletikke om med en moderne Kunsts kritisk-psykologiske Metode,
der ogsaa staar til min Raadighed, at bore Sonden i den og krænge
dens Indvolde ud --, hellerikke som den var, men saadan som jeg ser
og genser den under Barndomsmindets blaa Glas ... i en Soldis af
stille Glæde og Vemod uden Bitterhed. Det skal være en Bog for alle
dem, der, ligesom jeg, trænger til at sætte sig hen i en lun og god
Krog, hvor der er stængt af for Omverdenen og hvor Sjælen for en
Stund kan leve sit Blomsterliv i en Klosterhave. Det bliver en Bog
uden pirrende Nyt, uden blændende Farver, der bliver ingen Spænding,
næppe nok Handling i den. Mit Maal vil være naaet, om de, der læser
den, fornemmer det, som om jeg havde bragt en Buket af enkelt
farvede, enkelt duftende Markblomster ind i deres Stue.

Tre Gange om Ugen er Stiftsbiblioteket aabent. Da sidder jeg i
Læsestuen og blader i de gulnede Folianter, hvor i sirlig snørklet
Skrift den gamle Bys Liv og Begivenheder er optegnede. Jeg faar
vel næppe Brug for de Studier, jeg gør. Men jeg indsuger gennem
Fordybelsen i de henfarne Tider den Stemning af sagtmodig Fjærnhed,
hvormed jeg gærne vil fylde min Bog. Det er hellerikke alene for de
gamle Folianters Skyld, jeg søger Biblioteket. Selve Stedet drager
mig. Ofte glemmer jeg rent Bøgerne, der ligger foran mig, læner mig
tilbage i den brede slidte Svinelæders Armstol og fortaber mig i
drømmende Beskuelse. Biblioteket er indrettet i det gamle Brødrehus,
hvor i den katolske Tid Munkene boede og hvor i de første
Aarhundreder efter Reformationen Latinskolen holdtes. Den Stue, hvor
jeg sidder, var Klosterets Refektorium. Et temmelig langt Rum med
hvidkalkede Mure og tre lave spidse Loftsbuer. I den ene Langvæg
er Dørbuen -- saa lav, at en voksen Mand maa bukke sig for at gaa
igennem. Den aabner Udsigt ind til Biblioteks-Stuerne med deres
Reoler fulde af falmede gule og blaa Bogrygge. Paa den anden Langvæg
er der tre Vinduer, et for hver af Loftsbuerne. Vinduer, der sidder
i dybe buede Udskæringer og med smaabitte blyindfattede Ruder, som
Solen har brændt grønne og røggule. Vinduerne naaer næsten ned til
Jorden, og udenfor er Bibliotekarens Have, et Hjørne af den gamle
Klosterhave og Kirkegaard. Det er en frugtbar Jord med svulmende
Buskadser og et prangende Blomsterflor i fede skinnende Græsplæner.
Mellem en Klynge af bugnende tunge Frugttræer staar en høj, flad,
halvt forvitret Gravsten med en næsten udvisket Indskrift. Oftest
dvæler dog mit Blik ved den høje gule Mur, som omslutter Haven og
vender ud til en smal Gyde. Der er et Sted, hvor denne Mur bliver
dobbelt, dannende et lille Indelukke. Paa Indermuren ses Spor af
raat tilhugne Trin, og i Indelukket vantrives et ældgammelt Træ, der
nu kun løves i enkelte Grene.

Jeg ser paa Trinene i Muren, paa Træet i Indelukket og jeg drømmer
om den unge Munk, der har siddet her, hvor jeg nu sidder, og lyttet
til de gamle Brødres Pludren efter Nadveren. Men hans Tanker er
andetsteds, han følger Solnedgangens gyldne Spil i Løvet udenfor
de lave Vinduer og hans Hjærte banker uroligt. Saa er Brødrene
gaaet til Hvile, Natten har sænket sig over Klosterhaven. Men
forsigtigt aabnes Døren til Refektoriet, den unge Munk lister sig
hen til et af Vinduerne, løsner dets Hængsler og svinger sig ud i
Haven, famler sig i den mørke Nat frem til Muren, staar nu paa det
øverste af Trinene, bøjer en af Træets Grene ned til sig, lader den
vippe tilbage og er i Indelukket, hvor hans Elskede, formummet i
Mandsklæder, venter ham og bliver hos ham, mens Nattergalene slaar i
Klosterhavens Buske.

Jeg vil skrive en Bog om den gamle By og dens Klosterfred. Jeg vilde
ogsaa gærne lade Nattergalene synge over den unge Munk og hans
forborgne Kærligheds-Lykke.




IX.


                                                       _1. Juli._

Der er hændet mig en Stump af et Æventyr.

Jeg sidder i Morges, som sædvanlig, udenfor Pavillonen og fodrer
mine Spurve. Mange Spurve var der paa Vejrbakken, da jeg kom
hertil. De er blevne flere Dag for Dag, og de forfremmes stadig i
Dristighed. Efterhaanden kommer de bogstavelig ind i min Stue for at
se, om jeg ikke har noget til dem, og naar jeg en Morgen lader vente
paa mig med Affodringen, melder de sig med at pikke paa mine Vinduer
og med utaalmodige Skrig i Vindueskarmen.

Vi er netop naaede til Afslutningsnumret: et stort Stykke Hvedebrød,
som jeg lægger midt paa Bordet og som hele Banden styrter sig over,
hakker og river og slider i, indtil et dristigt Par ved forenede
Kræfter, efter et behændigt Indhug, slæber af med den sidste
Kæmpebid.

I det samme faar jeg Øje paa en ung lysklædt Pige, der staar paa
Trappen op til den øvre Bakkeafsats og som aabenbart har overværet
min Leg med Spurvene. Hun rødmer, da mit Blik møder hendes; hun
synes forvirret ved at blive overrasket i at have beluret mig, hun
gør en Bevægelse som for at vende om og flygte, saa betænker hun
sig, gaar med rolige Skridt ned ad Trappen og styrer lige hen til
mig.

Jeg rejser mig og hilser, hun gør en svag Bøjning med Hovedet, siger
saa med en Sikkerhed, der maaske er tilkæmpet, men synes naturlig:
»Jeg har noget til Dem.« Og hun tager op af Lommen et sammenlagt
Blad og giver mig det. Jeg ser forbavset paa hende og aabner
Papiret. »Ikke sandt« -- spørger hun -- »det er Deres? Jeg kendte
Dem, da jeg før saa' Dem.« Det, hun giver mig, er et Blad, som
fløj fra mig under Overrejsen paa Skibet og hvorpaa jeg har skrevet
nogle meget aabenhjærtige Linjer. »Ja, det er mit,« svarer jeg. »Men
hvorfra kender De mig og hvorledes vidste De, at det Papir tilhørte
mig?«

Hun smiler fornøjet: »Kender De slet ikke mig? ... Aa nej,
naturligvis; det var dumt af mig at spørge; De saa' mig vist næppe
nok.«

Nu har jeg det. Og jeg udbryder triumferende: »Det var Dem, der
ombord pludselig i Solopgangen stod ved Siden af mig!« »Rigtigt. Paa
det nær, at jeg ikke »pludselig« stod der. Jeg er ingen Heks eller
anden Slags Troldtøj, selv om jeg bor paa en Høj.«

At jeg ikke straks saa' det: det er jo Møllerens Datter. Pigen oppe
fra Højalteret.

Saa rækker hun mig Haanden. »Farvel og tilgiv, at jeg forstyrrede
Dem. Men jeg tænkte« -- og hun saa' alvorligt paa mig -- »at De
maaske gærne vilde have det Papir igen. Og da jeg fandt det paa
Skibet ved Landgangen, var De borte.«

Jeg stod og saa' efter hende, mens hun, med sin faste rolige Gang,
gik fra mig hen til Trappen, let og hastigt løb op og var borte som
et hvidt Syn mellem de mørke Graner.

Jeg havde paa Læben et Raab for at kalde hende tilbage, jeg var paa
Springet til at ile efter hende. Jeg syntes, der var saa meget endnu
jeg skulde spurgt hende om, talt med hende om, forklaret hende. Dog
i det samme tænkte jeg: »Nej, det er smukkest, som det er. De Ord,
der faldt mellem os, bryder ingen Stemning. Min Gudinde er stegen
ned fra Bjærget, har aabenbaret sig for mig et flygtigt Nu og er
atter forsvunden.«

Men jeg staar længe og stirrer med store Øjne paa den Plet, hvor hun
forsvandt.




X.


                                                       _2. Juli._

Er hun smuk? Hvordan ser hun egenlig ud? -- Jeg vil prøve paa at
klare mig det Indtryk, hun har gjort paa mig.

Luften bliver høj og ren dér, hvor hun træder. Hun er saa nyskabt i
sin Fuldmodenhed, straalende af ung Sundhed og uvilkaarlig Godhed.
Hendes Øjne er dybe og ømme, men klare og aabenhjærtige som et
Barns. Enten de smiler eller mørknes i Alvor, siger de deres Mening
lige ret ud, der er ingen Fordulgthed i Krogene. Hendes Barm er høj
og rund, hendes Midie slank, hendes Hofter yppige. Men hun bærer
sin rankvoksne Frodighed saa ubekymret som et Træ sin Sommerpragts
Fylde. Skred hun igennem en Lejr af berusede Krigsfolk, de vilde,
uden selv at vide hvorfor, aabne hende en bred Vej. Saa unærmelig
synes hun. Og dog saa dragende. Fra Haaret, der, skilt i Midten,
falder i to brune Bølger om hendes hvide Pande, til Fødderne, der i
taktfast Lethed fører hende hen over Jorden, danner hendes Person
og Væsen Indbegrebet af retlinjet Sikkerhed. Hun kender sin Vej og
sit Maal som den lyse Dag. Hos hende vilde man føle sig tryg. Hun
er uden Svig og Svinkeærinder, hun bringer med sig den Luft, som er
ovenover By og Skov. Hun drager som et Alter. Knælende maa man nærme
sig hende. Hun er Kvinden, som hun udgik af Naturens Haand: paa
samme Tid Jomfru og Moder.

Saadant er det Indtryk, jeg ubevidst modtog af hende allerede, da
hun stod i Solopgangen paa Skibet, og siden da jeg saa' hende oppe
paa Møllen, lænet til de hvilende Vinger. Og saadan aabenbarede hun
sig forgangen Dag for mig.

Paa det Papir, hun bragte mig tilbage, havde jeg skrevet: »Min Sjæl
raaber i Vaande paa en Moder.« Formodenlig har hun læst det. Jeg
føler ingen Undseelse derover. _Hun_ maa gærne kende mit Hjærtes
Hemmeligheder. Hun vil ikke spotte mig, ikke forraade mig.

Maaske viser hun sig ikke mere for mig. Ialfald faar jeg næppe
Lejlighed til oftere at tale med hende. Jeg synes dog, jeg nu har i
min Nærhed en forstaaende Ven og Medvider, En, hvis Sympati mildt
omsvæver mig, En, jeg ikke vilde frygte at søge Hjælp hos, om jeg
var i Nød. Naar jeg ensom vandrer i Skoven, ser jeg hendes Ansigt
smile mig imøde mellem Træerne, jeg gaar saa let og trygt, som
holdt jeg hendes faste varme Haand i min. Og gribes jeg stundom af
Tilbagefaldets forvirrende Tanker og hede Begær, maner jeg hendes
Billed frem som Værn. Og et svalende Aandepust køler mit Sind til Ro.

Hun er altid hos mig som min Skytsaand.




XI.


                                                       _4. Juli._

Jeg har en Veninde i Stiftelsen. Stiftelsen er et Alderdomshjem
for gamle Jomfruer og Enker. Min Veninde, en Jomfru paa henimod 70
Somre, er en af Stiftelsens yngste Beboere, hun anses af de Andre
for et rent Barn. Alligevel er hun Anstaltens Veteran. Hun har
nemlig været der, fra hun virkelig var Barn, slap derind, mod al
Skik og Brug, sammen med sin Moder, fordi hun var saa svagelig, at
hun, ifølge Lægernes Mening, kun havde en stakket Stund at leve.
Saa laa hun til Sengs i mange Aar, og da hun begyndte at komme sig,
var Moderen død, og man beholdt den nu 30-40 aarige Pige, der ikke
havde andre Paarørende end Stiftelsen.

I hendes Celle, den hun beboede sammen med tre andre Damer, --
Stiftelsens Beboere kaldte altid hinanden ceremonielt for »Damerne«
--, tilbragte jeg mange af min Barndoms lykkeligste Dage. Hun havde
utallige Talenter. Ingen fortalte saa dejlige Æventyr som hun,
hendes Forraad var uudtømmeligt, thi hun digtede dem selv; og ingen
kunde saamange Kortkunster. Desuden var hun en sand Kunstnerinde
med sine Hænder: klippede alle Slags Figurer af Papir, lavede den
vidunderligste Juletræspynt og flettede af Straa de nydeligste Kurve
og Æsker. Den sidste Færdighed, som hun drev til virkelig Kunst,
havde hun lært sig i de mange Aar, hun laa til Sengs. Madratsen
leverede Straaet, Resten besørgede hendes Fantasi og Snille.

At besøge hende var for et Barn at komme til Æventyrets Land. Altid
var her sælsomme Ting at høre og se. Og saa fik man til paa Købet
den dejligste Kop Kaffe, Kaffe med brun Kandis, som ikke kom i
Koppen, men suttedes og knasedes, mens man nød Nektaren.

Jeg var hos hende idag. I den lange sandstrøede Gang stod nu, som
før, gamle Koner, der nejede og nysgærrigt stak Hovederne sammen, og
den kendte Duft af Indelukkethed, Lavendler og sippet Renlevned slog
mig i Møde. Jeg bankede paa Døren til den Stue, som min Veninde har
beboet i et halvt Aarhundred, mens Hold paa Hold af Kontubernaler
er lagte i Kisten og baarne bort. I det smalle lange Rum med et
Vindue, vendende ud mod Stiftelsens Grønnehave, dybest inde sad fire
gamle Kvinder, hver paa sit Territorium, en Fjerdedel af Stuen, hvor
der akkurat er Plads til en Seng ved den ene Væg, en Kommode og et
Servantebord ved den anden Væg og to Stole imellem. Min Indtræden
vakte betuttet Nyfigenhed hos Stuens Beboere. Strikketøjet sank ned
i Skødet paa dem, og med spørgende Miner afventede de, hvem Besøget
af den fremmede Herre kunde gælde. Jeg havde straks opdaget min
Veninde paa Primadonna-Pladsen ved Vinduet, graanet og rynket, endnu
mere mager end før, men med de samme kloge og fiffige Øjne. Og det
Liv, der kom over hende, da hun omsider genkendte mig. Hun blev helt
rød i Kinderne af Sindsbevægelse, aabnede Armene og trykkede mig
til sit indfaldne Bryst. »Ja, saa sandelig er det ikke ham! Og han
kommer her til mig!«

Saamegen Lykke har jeg aldrig drømt om at gøre. Jeg blev fejret som
en Prins. Min Veninde var ganske fortumlet. Ikke blot Stuens Damer
blev præsenterede for mig, hun hentede rundt fra Stuer og Gange
alle de Gamle, der havde kendt mine Forældre og set mig som Barn.
De stimede ind, rokkende Morliller og strunke Gammeljomfruer, de
trykkede mine Hænder, de puffedes om mig og pludrede i Munden paa
hinanden for at fortælle mig, hvor godt de mindedes mig, hvor nøje
de havde kendt mine Forældre, og for at spørge til hele Familjens
Befindende.

Kaffe fik jeg i Guds Velsignelse, men med Kandis'en kneb det. De
gamle Damer kunde ikke forsone sig med, at jeg ikke vilde have hvidt
Sukker.

Da jeg omsider gik, blev jeg fulgt til Dørs af den halve Stiftelse.
Men med min Veninde aftalte jeg, at vi, naar jeg kom igen, skulde
have det lidt mere for os selv.




XII.


                                                       _9. Juli._

Jeg fandt forleden i Biblioteket nogle Familjeoptegnelser, som jeg
fik Lyst til at kontrollere. Jeg var derfor idag oppe hos Præsten
for at faa Lov til at slaa efter i de gamle Kirkebøger.

Det var en ung høj Mand med et skarpt Ansigt og stærke, lyse Øjne.
Med største Forekommenhed gik han mig til Haande og lagde i det
hele et behageligt Verdensmands-Væsen for Dagen. Men vi havde ikke
samtalet i mange Minutter, før han røbede sig som en af den strænge
Kristendoms ivrigste Forkæmpere. Han førte Ordet; jeg sad og lyttede
halvt aandsfraværende til. Jeg forstod dog saameget, at han var
ifærd med at rydde op i den gamle Slendrian, hvori hans Forgængere
havde efterladt Byens kirkelige Forhold. Han skildrede den gamle
By som et Sodoma af Ugudelighed og Ryggesløshed. Alle Laster gik
i Svang: Drik, Usædelighed, Kortspil og Foreningsballer. De, som
roste den gamle By, kendte den ikke eller lod sig bedrage af dens
tilsyneladende Bravhed og Elskværdighed. Med Guds Hjælp skulde Piben
dog snart faa en anden Lyd. Allerede nu sporede han Frugter af sit
Vækkelses-Arbejde, og han var endda kun lige begyndt.

Det var saalænge siden, jeg havde hørt Fanatismens Ord. De buldrede
som en tom Torden over mit Hoved. Saa grim han saa' ud i sin
harmfulde Vrede, saa vanvittigt det lød, at denne unge rasende
Mand vilde lære skikkelige Borgerfolk Gudsfrygt. Jeg tænkte et Par
Gange paa at modsige ham, men opgav det. Jeg følte mig saa udenfor
Striden, og ingensinde har jeg dybere fornummet Lykken ved ikke at
være med længer. At tænke sig, at her gaar en Mand, som indbilder
sig at arbejde i en algod Guds Tjeneste, og fraader af Vrede, mens
Verden trænger til Mildhed og Fred. I Sandhed, Ulvene rives om
Lammene.

Da jeg rejser mig for at gaa, bliver Præsten pludselig atter den
belevne Verdensmand. Trykker mig varmt i Haanden, smiler venligt og
siger en Spøg om sin egen Hidsighed.

Men mens jeg vandrer hjemefter, ynker jeg min gamle By. Den har haft
sin gode Tid med de gamle Præster. De forstod den, de læmpede deres
Forkyndelse efter dens Behov. De sad gærne selv ved L'hombre-Bordet,
de kimsede ikke af et godt Glas, de glædede sig, naar de Unge
svingede sig i Dansen, og de græd ikke, naar de saa' en lidt for
trivelig Mø myrtesmykket træde frem for Brudeskamlen.

Jeg synes, Luften er bleven trykkende; der er ingen rigtig Fryd i
Solskinnet, Blæsten er kold og graa. Du gamle, sunde, livslystne By,
nu kommer din onde Besøgelsens Stund.

... Først i Vejrbakkens Sol ryster jeg Misstemningen af mig. Og dér
venter mig en Glæde, som fylder mig med de taabeligste Fantasier og
faar mit Hjærte til at slaa en ganske ungdommelig Stormmarsch.

Paa mit Arbejdsbord stod en Buket Roser. Et Bud havde bragt den uden
anden Besked end at den skulde stilles paa den fremmede Herres Bord.

Fra hvem skulde den være, om ikke fra hende? Hun har altsaa ikke
glemt mig; hun tænker paa mig; hun sender ovenikøbet en Hilsen. Et
Øjeblik formørkes min Henrykkelse ved Tanken om, at Buketten maaske
kunde være fra min Veninde i Stiftelsen. Nej, umuligt. Saa fine
Blomster gror ikke i den gamle By. De plukkes kun paa Vejrbakken, i
Møllerens Have.

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi[10] was born on 2 October 1869[1] in Porbandar, a coastal town which was then part of the Bombay Presidency, British India.[11] He was born in his ancestral home, now known as Kirti Mandir.[12] His father, Karamchand Gandhi (1822–1885), served as the diwan (chief minister) of Porbander state, a small princely salute state in the Kathiawar Agency of British India.[12][13] His grandfather was Uttamchand Gandhi, also called Utta Gandhi.[12] His mother, Putlibai, who was from a Pranami Vaishnava family,[14][15] was Karamchand's fourth wife, the first three wives having apparently died in childbirth.[16][17]
The Indian classics, especially the stories of Shravana and king Harishchandra, had a great impact on Gandhi in his childhood. In his autobiography, he admits that they left an indelible impression on his mind. He writes: "It haunted me and I must have acted Harishchandra to myself times without number." Gandhi's early self-identification with truth and love as supreme values is traceable to these epic characters.[18][19]
In May 1883, the 13-year-old Mohandas was married to 14-year-old Kasturbai Makhanji (her first name was usually shortened to "Kasturba", and affectionately to "Ba") in an arranged child marriage, according to the custom of the region.[20] In the process, he lost a year at school.[21] Recalling the day of their marriage, he once said, "As we didn't know much about marriage, for us it meant only wearing new clothes, eating sweets and playing with relatives." However, as was prevailing tradition, the adolescent bride was to spend much time at her parents' house, and away from her husband.[22] In 1885, when Gandhi was 15, the couple's first child was born, but survived only a few days. Gandhi's father, Karamchand Gandhi, had also died earlier that year.[23] The religious background was eclectic. Gandhi's father was Hindu[24] Modh Baniya[25] and his mother was from Pranami Vaishnava family. Religious figures were frequent visitors to the home.[26]
Mohandas and Kasturba had four more children, all sons: Harilal, born in 1888; Manilal, born in 1892; Ramdas, born in 1897; and Devdas, born in 1900.[20] At his middle school in Porbandar and high school in Rajkot, Gandhi remained a mediocre student. He shone neither in the classroom nor on the playing field. One of the terminal reports rated him as "good at English, fair in Arithmetic and weak in Geography; conduct very good, bad handwriting." He passed the matriculation exam at Samaldas College in Bhavnagar, Gujarat, with some difficulty. Gandhi's family wanted him to be a barrister, as it would increase the prospects of succeeding to his father's post.[27]






XIII.


                                                      _20. Juli._

Nattergalene synger i Vejrbakkens Buske. Jeg har iaften vandret i
Skoven med min Møllerdatter, som hedder Grethe.

Saa lidt det i Grunden er, saa lidt mærkværdigt. Og dog synes jeg,
at der ingensinde er hændet mig noget større.

Jeg gaar i Skoven og jeg møder hende. Vi er Naboer, saa deri er
intet underligt. Vi kender hinanden, altsaa havde det været den
rimeligste Ting i Verden, om jeg havde standset hende og talt
til hende. Det var imidlertid hende, som standsede mig, hvori
hellerintet naturstridigt var.

Hun spurgte: Hvordan lever De? Omgaas De mange Mennesker? Savner De
ikke Hovedstaden?

Jeg svarede: Jeg bliver for hver Dag lykkeligere. Jeg omgaas Ingen,
savner Intet, i Forgaars fik jeg ovenikøbet en Buket Roser.

Hun siger nu, at Roserne var fra hende, og jeg frydes over, at hun
ingen Hemmelighed gør deraf. Hun siger, at hun havde faaet saadan
Lyst til at sende mig nogle af sine Blomster. »Jeg tænkte, det vilde
glæde Dem, fordi de er saa skønne og sjældne. Og jeg vilde gærne
glæde Dem.«

Jeg spurgte hende, hvorfor hun nærede saa venlige Følelser overfor
mig, en næsten Fremmed. Hun svarede: »Fordi jeg forstod, at De ikke
har været lykkelig. Og jeg, jeg har altid haft det saa godt.«

Jeg beder hende fortælle noget om sit Liv deroppe med Faderen i
Ensomheden ved Møllen. Hun ryster paa Hovedet: »Der er ikke stort
at fortælle. Jeg røgter mine Blomster, mine Bier og mine Frugter, og
jeg læser for min Fader. Vil De vide mere, saa kom selv op og se.
Vi, ligesom De, omgaas Ingen. Derfor vil vi passe sammen.« Og hun
tilføjer: »De behøver ikke at svare Ja eller Nej. Er De lykkelig ved
at være ene, vilde det være meningsløst, om De søgte Selskab. Men
synes De en Dag, at De har Brug for os, er De velkommen.«

Saa staar vi og skal byde Farvel. Men pludselig kommer jeg i Tanker
om, at der er noget, jeg har glemt at faa Rede paa, og jeg siger:
»Jeg saa' Dem en Dag oppe paa Møllen. De lænede Dem mod den ene
Vinge. Sæt nu, Møllen var begyndt at gaa!«

»Aa nej,« svarer hun, »der var ingen Fare. Møllen har i de sidste
Par Aar ikke gaaet. Fader er gammel og næsten blind, han er hørt op
med at drive Møllen.«

Hun nikker Farvel og gaar. Men jeg bliver staaende og hvisker tusind
Velsignelser efter hende, al den Takkens og Lykkens stille Musik,
som hun har fyldt mit Hjærte med.

Elsker jeg hende? Jeg tror det ikke; thi jeg begærer hende ikke.
Der er intet mellem os, som jeg ønsker andet og mere. Mine Sanser
ligger som lykkeligt smilende Vuggebørn og lytter til hendes Stemmes
Kærtegn. Hendes Øjnes store milde Varme svøber mig. Hendes Haandtryk
er Aftenbønnens Englevagt. Kunde det umulige tænkes, at hun i Nat
kom til min Dør og bad om at blive indladt, jeg vilde flygte som fra
en Vanhelligelse, jeg vilde føle mig som en Forbandet paa Jorden.
Som En, der har staaet ved Renselsens Kilde og set den grumses af at
spejle hans Billed.

Da jeg atter sidder i min Stue med hendes Roser foran mig, gribes
jeg af en Trang til at tilkendegive hende, hvormeget hendes Venskab
betyder for mig. I et hvidt Papir fæster jeg en af Roserne og
skriver nedenunder: »Fra En, den har gjort karsk«, haster op gennem
Skoven til Møllerhuset og fastgør Rosen over Døren. Jeg véd jo, at
den vil falde i de rette Hænder, da hendes Fader er blind.

Og jeg vandrer langsomt hjemad, mens Nattergalene synger i mit
Bryst.




XIV.


                                                      _29. Juli._

Jeg sidder i Morges nede paa Bolværket ved Havnen for at se
Dampskibet fra Hovedstaden komme. For at undgaa mulige Bekendte
blandt Passagererne har jeg sat mig lidt afsides, ved Oplagspladsen
for ankommende Varer. Jeg morer mig med at se ned i Vandet paa de
grønslimede Bolværkspæle, hvor Krabber kravler mellem fastgroede
Muslinger, og jeg tænker paa gamle Dage, da det var en Fest, naar
Dampskibet, den eneste daværende Kommunikation med Hovedstaden,
bragte Gæster i Besøg. Festen begyndte ved aarle Gry. Den Gang,
som nu, var Ankomsttiden meget skiftende. Under normale Forhold
skulde Skibet lægge i Havn Kl. 5, og fra det Klokkeslet gjaldt det
om at være parat; men faldt det i med en af de Taager, der udmærker
Fjorden og som i Løbet af faa Sekunder overtrækker den med et
uigennemsigtigt Bomulds-Slør fra Bred til Bred, kan Ventetiden blive
flere Timer lang. Ofte løb vi Børn fem, seks Gange frem og tilbage
for at melde vore Forældre Tilstanden. Endelig hejses Kurven paa
Fjordbakkens Signalstang, Taagen letter, nu kommer det, Skibet, det
længselsfuldt ventede, som bringer Tanter og Gaver samt megen fin
Mad og en Række af Fornøjelser i Udsigt.

Og det hænder, mens jeg idag sidder og opfrisker disse Minder,
at Taagen sænker sig over Fjorden, ligesom Skibet dukker frem
om den sidste Pynt. En graa Mur glider ned foran mig, jeg maa
sunde mig lidt, før jeg forstaar, hvad der er sket. Langt ude fra
lyder Dampskibets Taagehorn, jammerfuldt klagende, ængsteligt
varskoende. Men det er klart, at Kaptejnen, saa nær sit Maal,
forsøger at læmpe sig frem. Langsomt nærmer Taagehornets Tuden sig,
nu ses Mastetoppene ragende op over Skyen. Da, ligesaa pludselig
som den er kommen, forsvinder Taagen. Et Blændværk: i glitrende
Morgensol ligger Skibet et Par Hundred Alen fra Land og, forude paa
Overdækket, staar en ung høj Kvinde i et langt, mørkt Regnstykke.
Bedrager mit Syn mig? Er det hende? -- Uden at bryde mig om Per
eller Poul styrter jeg hen til Landgangen. Nu har den unge Dame
faaet Øje paa mig, hun vifter med sit Lommetørklæde. Det er hende!

Gud være lovet for det Smil, der lyser mig i Møde. Hun er altsaa
glad ved at se mig, glad ved saa uventet at træffe mig her.

Vi følges op gennem Byen. Jeg er saa betagen af Lykke, at jeg
ikke kan tale. Jeg gaar gennem _min_ By ved _hendes_ Side, og
jeg hører hende fortælle, hvordan det hænger sammen med hendes
Rejse. Hun kommer sammesteds fra som hin Morgen, jeg saa' hende
paa Skibet, fra en lille Handelsplads ved Fjordens Munding. Derud
tager hun hver fjortende Dag for at sælge Havens Produkter: Frugt,
Honning, Syltetøjer og henkogte Grøntsager. Hendes Fader har der en
Forretningsven, som han foretrækker at handle med fremfor med den
gamle Bys Købmænd.

Da hun har fortalt mig alt dette og jeg stadig tier, spørger hun:
»Men hvad vilde De egenlig ved Skibet? Ventede De Nogen?« »Ja,«
svarer jeg, »det gjorde jeg vist. Fra min Barndom af har Skibet
altid bragt mig Nogen, jeg holder af. Og Skibet narrede mig
heller ikke idag.« Og da jeg ser, at mine Ord ikke skræmmer eller
forstemmer hende, fortsætter jeg: »Men nu De? Tænkte De, da De
stirrede mod Land, at blive modtagen af Nogen?« Hun siger: »Jeg
stod inde i Taagen og tænkte paa Dem, saadan som De var den første
Gang, jeg mødte Dem. Og saa saa' jeg Dem paa den anden Side Taagen.«
Uvilkaarligt griber jeg hendes Haand, og hun trækker den ikke
tilbage: »Ja, nu er jeg paa den anden Side Taagen.«

Men lidt efter, da vi skilles, siger hun: »Kommer De saa op til
Møllen? Vi venter Dem.«




XV.


                             _Natten mellem 1ste og 2den August._

I to Dage tøvede jeg med at følge Indbydelsen. Jeg tænkte: hun har
sagtens ikke ment, Du skulde komme ligestraks. Men iaften maatte jeg
derop. Da jeg kom, stod Grethe i Døren: »Naa, endelig!« sagde hun.
»Fader begyndte allerede at drille mig med, at De nok helst var fri
for vort Selskab.« Saa vidste jeg, at jeg var velkommen og kunde
straks føle mig tryg og vel til Mode.

Møllerens Dagligstue, gennem hvis Vinduer man har Udsigt over
Fjorden, ligner en Kahyt, lavloftet og dyb, med en lang gulpoleret
Hestehaarssofa, et stort Klapbord, læderbetrukne Stole, Søkort og
Billeder af Skibe paa Væggen, i et Hjørne en Skibsmodel, i et
andet Hjørne et gammeldags Klaver, paa Hylder og Skabe Konkylier og
udstoppede tropiske Fiske, over Bordet en Svinglampe.

Herind blev jeg ført til Mølleren, hvis brede ranke Kæmpeskikkelse
jeg straks genkendte, men hvis Blik under de buskede graa Bryn
var blegt og udslukt. Han sad i Sofahjørnet i en blaa Pjækkert og
dampede paa en svær Merskumspibe. Grethe førte mig hen til ham
og sagde: »Her er han, den fremmede Herre, kan Du se, han kom
alligevel.« Hans haarede brune Haand trykkede hjærteligt min, og
dermed var jeg hjemme i Møllerens Stue.

Aldrig har jeg nogetsteds følt mig saa hjemme. Jeg sad og tænkte:
har jeg set alt dette før i en Drøm, eller er det en Drøm, som min
Sjæls Længsler fremtryller? Jeg syntes, jeg havde levet mange Aar i
disse ejendommelige Omgivelser, i denne Kahyt, der som et Vrag var
kastet i Land paa et gæstevenligt Bjærg, sammen med denne blinde
Olding, der talte vise Ord, og denne unge Pige, der stille hyggede
og smykkede Eneboerlivet for os.

Jeg lyttede til den Gamles Fortællinger og havde Sjælen jublende
fuld af Grethes Billed. Iført en tarvelig graa Hjemmekjole og et
broget Bondeforklæde syslede hun ud og ind, bragte os skaaret
Smørrebrød og Frugtmost af egen Tilvirkning, stoppede os bagefter
Piber og bryggede os en Toddy af gammel vestindisk Rom. Hver Gang,
hun vendte tilbage, strømmede Solskin ind i Stuen. At den Gamle
ogsaa fornam det, saa' jeg paa de Glimt af Liv, hendes Indtræden
altid tændte i hans Øjne.

Da Grethe var ude at tilberede Aftensmaden, fortalte Mølleren:

»Før jeg faldt til Ro heroppe, foer jeg vidt omkring. Jeg førte
Skibe paa de store Have, baade for egen og andres Regning. Men en
skønne Dag syntes jeg, det kunde være nok. Jeg havde set mere end
jeg brød mig om, Tiderne blev daarlige for Sejlskibene, jeg mente
ikke, Sejladsen førte til ret meget mere. Saa byggede jeg Møllen
her. En Mølle er dog et Slags Skib, den bruger baade Vind og Sejl
for at male i Posen, og tillige maler den langt sikrere. De andre
Møllere paa Egnen korsede sig over den ny Møller, der førte sin
Mølle som en Skude og lod staa til selv i den stærkeste Storm.
Efterhaanden havde min Mølle malet saameget, som jeg og min Datter
behøvede. Jeg var gammel, mit Syn ødelagt af den skarpe Blæst og
det hvirvlende Melstøv. Og saa bliver man saa træt af saadan en
Mølle, der evigt støjer og altid svinger rundt paa samme Plet. Jeg
var træt, trængte til at lade Møllen hvile og faa Stilhed omkring
mig. Deri er jo intet underligt. De, der dog ikke er nogen gammel
Mand, har nok haft noget af samme Fornemmelse, efter hvad Grethe har
fortalt mig.

Mærkeligere er det med Grethe. Hun er ligesom Barn af Stilheden
heroppe, hun kan ikke slippe den, saa ung hun er. Hvis De tror, det
er mig, som øver Pres paa hende for at faa hende til at sidde og
kukkelure sammen med mig, tager De Fejl. Jeg har ofte nok foreslaaet
hende, at hun skulde se sig om i Verden. Jeg har endogsaa tilbudt
hende at flytte med hende et Aarstid til Hovedstaden. Hun vil ikke
bort herfra. Her synes hun, hun har alt det, der gør hende glad. For
det derude føler hun kun Frygt og Uvilje. Det er ikke kommet med
Alderen, gennem Læsning af alle de utilfredse moderne Bøger, som man
kunde formode. Hun er født med det. Da hun var en lille Pige, tænkte
jeg at skulle gøre hende en Fornøjelse ved at skikke hende paa et
Besøg over til hendes Moders Slægtninge i Hovedstaden. Hun blev
artigt sin Tid ud; men da hun kom tilbage, tog hun det Løfte af mig,
at jeg aldrig mere maatte sende hende bort. Familjen havde været god
nok imod hende og gjort alt for at adsprede hende. Men hun længtes
kun efter Vejrbakken, hun var bleven bleg af at længes og føle sig
ene.«

Den Gamle standsede og sad en Stund fordybet i Tanker. Saa tilføjede
han: »Naa, en Gang maa hun vel bort herfra -- naar jeg er død.
Medmindre hun faar en Mand, der kan finde sig i at blive her hos
hende. Men Vejrbakken er just ikke frodig paa unge Mænd, og, saavidt
jeg kan skønne, har Grethe hellerikke været videre befængt med
Giftetanker. Ogsaa i det Stykke er hun anderledes end unge Piger
flest, endda hun har læst nok af Romaner om Elskov og Sværmeri.«

-- -- Jeg blev længe siddende i Møllerens Stue. Da Mørket faldt paa,
tændte Grethe Lampen og satte sig til Klaveret. I det aabne Vindu
tegnede sig Omridset af den hvilende Mølle paa Baggrund af den blege
Sommerhimmel. Og ud i Stilheden bares til Klaverets spinkle, sprøde
Toner Grethes simple, rørende Sang.

Men i Sofahjørnet slumrede den gamle Møller, med Lampelysets bløde
Skær over det mildt smilende Ansigt.




XVI.


                                                    _15. August._

Hvad mon Verden for Tiden foretager sig? Var den store Krig
eller den store Revolution brudt løs, havde Rygtet vel været saa
højrøstet, at det var naaet mig. Nu da ingen Rygter forstyrrer min
avisløse Tilværelse, tør jeg sikkert slutte, at Begivenhederne ikke
er overvældende. Fra det hjemlige Marked indskrænker Noteringerne
sig formodenlig til det sædvanlige Antal Forlovelser og Skandaler,
den sædvanlige politiske Suppe paa en Pølsepind, der næppe en Gang
har Lugten af Kødmad tilbage, en Smule Teatervrøvl i Anledning af
den tilstundende Sæson og Forkyndelsen af et Par Snese nye Bøger,
hvoraf de tre Fjerdedele vil være glemte samme Dag, de udkommer
-- fordi de handler om alt muligt andet end det, der ligger baade
Forfatteren og hans Læsere paa Sinde, eller fordi Forfatteren ikke
har noget paa Sinde, der kan interessere Andre end ham selv og hans
nærmeste Paarørende.

Det er Betænkeligheder af den sidste Art, der faar mig til at tøve
med min Bog om den gamle By. Den ene Dag finder jeg Emnet altfor
ringe og ubetydende, frygter, at Folk med Foragt skal vende sig fra
min Bog, sigende: hvad vedkommer dette os? Men næste Dag, naar jeg
vaagner i svulmende Lykke over al den Skønhed af gamle Minder og nye
Indtryk, hvori jeg lever, genfødes Forvisningen om, at min Bog ogsaa
maa kunne bringe Bud til andre Hjærter, der har følt og drømt de
samme Længsler som mit.

Saaledes gaar Arbejdet langsomt og rykvis under de skiftende
Stemninger. Eller tøver jeg af den Grund, at de nye Oplevelser væver
ind i de gamle Minder en Roman, som endnu kun er i sin Vorden; hvis
Afslutning jeg ialfald ikke kender?

Hæmmes jeg maaske ogsaa af en vis fejg Angst for de Venner og
Veninder, jeg har forladt? Faar de skeptiske Smil, hvormed jeg
forudser, at de vil læse om min Pilgrimsfærd til Barndommens hellige
Land, undertiden min Haand til at standse? Er jeg selv her i min
sikre Ensomhed, borte fra alle Rygter og alle Randgloser, under
Selskabets Trældomsfrygt?

Jeg betroede mig iaften til Grethe, mens vi gik vor Aftentur paa
Møllebakken. Da jeg havde endt mit Skriftemaal, sagde hun, varsomt
og med sænket Hoved, ligesom hun vilde undskylde, at hun udtalte
sin Mening: »Efter hvad jeg kender til Literatur -- jeg har før
læst ikke saa lidt -- og saavidt jeg kan dømme, er Frygt for at
tale rent ud, Frygt for at give sig helt hen, Mangelen hos næsten
alle Forfattere. Jeg har den Fornemmelse, naar jeg læser en Bog, at
Forfatteren, selv hvor han foregiver Aabenhjærtighed, altid skeler
til Læsernes Domstol, altid er betænkt paa sin Værdighed, altid
pynter og pudser sig lidt, for at Ingen skal tage Anledning til
Forargelse eller Spot. Bryder De Dem om mit Raad, der maaske lyder
anmassende, saa skriv, som om De ikke havde andet Publikum end mig,
der er en uvidende Pige og ikke klog nok til hverken at spotte eller
forarges.«

Vi var standsede, vi saa' Fjorden og Byen dybt under os:

»Eller skriv,« sagde hun, »som den, der boer paa Vejrbakken.«




XVII.


                                                    _23. August._

Jeg har opdaget, at Grethe i Grunden slet ikke kender den gamle
By, og jeg har bedt hende, om jeg maatte vise hende den. Jeg vilde
saa gærne, at hun skulde lære at holde af den, saadan som jeg gør.
Fordi hun forstod, at det vilde glæde mig, modtog hun mit Tilbud.
Hun synes ogsaa at interessere sig for, hvad jeg viser og fortæller
hende, men mest morer det hende vist at se min Iver som den gamle
Bys Fremfører.

Idag viste jeg hende Slottet.

Slottet, der ligger nede ved Fjorden og gør Tjeneste som
Amtmandsbolig, er en lang graa pakhuslignende Bygning med et Utal af
smaarudede Vinduer i to Etager. Kun den Række af gamle Poppeltræer,
der paraderer foran det, og den rødkappede Skildvagt, der vandrer
frem og tilbage mellem Poplerne, kendetegner det som et fremragende
Hus. Som det nu fremtræder, er Slottet hverken særlig gammelt eller
paa nogen Maade mærkeligt. Det har kun sparsomme Rester fra den Tid,
det var et virkeligt Slot og Sæde for Kongens Lensmand.

Det er henimod Skumring, da jeg med Grethe vandrer gennem den dybe
skumle Port i Forhuset ind i den store firkantede Slotsgaard,
der omsluttes af lave hvide Længer. Græsset gror frodigt mellem
Gaardens Brostene, langs Længerne staar paa fornem Herregaardsvis
smaa kuppelklippede Linde. Ved Foden af Træerne løber, hele Gaarden
rundt, en Rendesten saa dyb og bred som en lille Bæk, med talrige
Gangbrædter over.

Vi sidder paa en Bænk under Lindene ved Længen lige over for
Porten, hvor Vandet fra Rendestenene samler sig og forsvinder i en
underjordisk Afløbskanal ned til Fjorden. Og mens Solen daler i
Bakkerne Nordvest for Byen og sender sine sidste Straaler paa Skraa
gennem Porten ind over Gaardens Græs, fortæller jeg Grethe om den
strænge Hr. Esben, der for mange Aarhundreder siden raadede her paa
Slottet, navnkundig ikke mindre som Kvindebedaarer end som Kriger.
Til Sikkerhed i Ufredstider var af hans Forgængere bygget en Løngang
fra Slottets Kælder til Volden paa den anden Side Fjorden. Hr. Esben
benyttede dog Løngangen mest til sine galante Æventyr. Han havde et
vennesælt, nedladende Væsen, samme Herre. Ofte bød han en Borger
med hans unge Kone eller Fæstemø til Gilde paa Slottet. Men naar
Borgermanden var drukken ganske sanseløs, lokkede han den unge Kone
ud af Salen, lod hende, om hun gjorde Modstand, kneble og førte
hende gennem Løngangen under Fjorden til et lidet Hus med vellystige
Kammerser, hvor Gildet saa fortsattes, den Bortførte oftest ej til
Ubehag, saasom Hr. Esben var saare skøn og gavmild; den narrede Mand
eller Elsker til megen Fortrædelighed, naar han vaagnede af sin Rus
og fandt Fuglen fløjet. Dog saa' han sin Fordel i at tie, holde gode
Miner til slet Spil og bide Skammen i sig. For Hr. Esben var kendt
som en nidkær Herre med en haard Haand. Desuden var der jo ingen
Anledning til at udbasunere over den ganske Stad den Tort, der var
bleven Ens Kæreste til Del, især naar man ikke kunde være saa sikker
paa, hvor god eller hvor daarlig hendes Vilje havde været. Et og
andet sivede dog ud gennem forblommede Ord, et og andet kunde anes
ved pludseligt brudte Trolovelser og Ufred mellem Ægtefæller, der
før havde levet i god Enighed. En Sky af hemmelig Angst og hviskende
Had lagde sig efterhaanden mellem Byen og Slottet.

Wu Yajun, 46, is general director of Longhu Real Estate Development Co, a developer in the southwestern municipality of Chongqing. Wu ranks as the second wealthiest woman in the world, with an estimated personal fortune of 28 billion yuan.

Saa hændte det, at Hr. Esben kastede sine Øjne paa Borgmesterens
dejlige 17 Aars Datter, nygift med en af Byens raskeste og dygtigste
unge Haandværkere, Klaus Bryde. Hr. Esben smægtede og smiskede en
Stund med dristige Blik og lønlige Tegn, naar han red forbi den
unge Kones Vindue. Og da han havde forstaaet, at hun ikke tog ham
hans Hyldest ilde op, greb han den først mulige Anledning til at
byde Klaus Bryde og Kone være Gæster paa Slottet. Klaus Bryde havde
imidlertid lugtet Lunten. Han drak sig fuld kun paa Skrømt. Alt mens
hans Hoved sank dybere paa Brystet, iagttog han de ømme Blikke, der
veksledes mellem hans Kone og Lensmanden. Og ikke saasnart var de
to forsvundne ud af Salen, hvor de troede Ægtemanden hvilende i en
salig Rus, før Klaus Bryde rejste sig, gik hen til et af Slottets
Vinduer og gav en lille Skare udenfor ventende Venner et aftalt
Tegn. Med Vaaben i Haand trængte de sig ind i Slottet, overmandede
og kneblede den intet anende Vagt, fandt, anførte af Klaus Bryde,
den aabne Dør til Løngangen, saa' i det Fjærne det blege Lys af
døende Fakler og ilede ind i Mørket ... -- Om det Drama, der er
udspillet paa Fjordens Dyb, beretter Sagnet følgende: Da Slottets
Folk den næste Morgen, opskræmte af den omsider befriede Vagts
Fortælling, kom til, var Løngangens Dør smækket i Laas. Det varede
en rum Stund, inden den svære Jærndør sprængtes, og i det samme, den
aabnedes, saa' man de uskadte Lig af tre af Klaus Brydes Venner.
Efter en haabløs Kamp for at sprænge Døren var de kvalte. Længere
inde i Gangen fandtes flere Lig af Kvalte, midtvejs Lensmanden, den
unge Kone, Klaus Bryde, de to Fakkelsvende og et Par Andre, alle
skrækkeligt lemlæstede. -- Siden hed det sig, at en Fisker, der hin
Nat havde stanget Aal paa Fjorden ligeover Løngangen, mente at have
hørt Vaabenraslen nede fra Dybet.

       *       *       *       *       *

... Solen er gaaet ned. Den graa Skumring er falden over den stille
Slotsgaard. Da lyder et dumpt Pjask i Vandet lige bag os og Grethe
griber mig i Armen. »Hvad var det?« spørger hun. »Se selv,« svarer
jeg og peger paa Gangbrædtet:

»De gamle Slots-Rotters Time er inde. De drager deres Spøgelse-Færd
fra Slottet ned til Fjorden. Se, snart svømmer de og snart
entrer de over Brædtet. Sid bare roligt, de følger deres vante
Vej, herop kommer de ikke. Det er en hel Karavane, de skal ned at
se til den gamle Løngang, vaage over, at Ingen forstyrrer dens
hemmelighedsfulde Hvile i Sagnets Mørke.«

»Hvad har Rotterne med Løngangen at bestille?« spørger Grethe.

»Kom, saa skal De høre!«

Jeg fører hende hen til en Kælderluge i et Hjørne af Gaarden. Gennem
Lugen, som jeg aabner, ser vi ned i nogle mørke murede Hvælvinger,
hvorfra en klam indelukket Gravkammer-Luft slaar os i Møde.

Og jeg fortæller: »Da disse Krypt-Hvælvinger -- vi gaar ikke
derned; thi paa dette Tidspunkt er der næppe ganske hyggeligt --
udgravedes i forrige Aarhundrede, paastaar man, at Løngangen, som
man troede forlængst forsvunden, om den overhovedet nogensinde
havde eksisteret, genfandtes. En af Arbejderne tilbød at gaa
derind; spændt afventede man Resultatet: man hørte hans Skridt og
hans muntre Sang fjærne sig, det var tydeligt, at han naaede frem.
Saa blev alt stille. Man ventede og ventede, men han kom aldrig
tilbage. Byens Øvrighed lovede da en Straffefange Friheden, om han
vilde forny Forsøget. Det var en forsoren Galgenfugl, der frygtede
hverken Gud eller Fanden. Han slog til. En Tov blev bundet ham om
Livet: saasnart der var Fare paa Færde, skulde han trække til.
Karlen gik rask ned og forsvandt. Paa Tovet, der droges efter ham,
kunde man skønne, at han fandt aaben Vej adskillige Favne. Pludselig
standsede Tovet, uden at der dog rykkedes i det. Man tænkte, han var
stødt paa en eller anden Hindring, som han var ifærd med at rydde.
Standsningen blev imidlertid uhyggelig langvarig. Maaske Manden var
besvimet. Og man halede ind i Tovet: det kom tilbage uden Byrde; det
var gnavet over -- af Rotterne, som havde beholdt Karlen ... Men
endnu ses i Hvælvingen en rusten Jærndør og indenfor den et Par
murede Trin, som fører nedad.«

-- -- Vi stod atter udenfor, hvor de gamle Popler og Skildvagten
i sin røde Kappe paraderer. Smilende saa' Grethe paa Slottet og
sagde: »Hvem skulde nu tro, at den grimme, kedelige Bygning kunde
forskrække Nogen! Og dog var jeg ikke rigtig hyggelig til Mode før.«

»Ja,« svarede jeg, »saadan gaar det med hele den gamle By. For
den, der haster den ligegyldig igennem, er den kun en almindelig,
hverdagsagtig Provinsby. Men for den, der oplader den sit Hjærte,
aabenbarer den en Skat af fin Poesi og sære Sagn.«




XVIII.


                                                  _3. September._

Vi har inat haft den første Efteraarsstorm. Jeg laa i Sengen og
lyttede til den.

Oppe fra Skoven kommer et Vindstød susende, rusker i Pavillonens
Træværk, saa det knager i alle Fuger, og bulrer videre ned over
Bakken til Byen. Stød følger paa Stød, om og om igen den samme
Leg, stadig vildere, stadig voldsommere. Træerne sukker, gisper og
stønner. Stormen giver ikke Pardon. Hvad der ikke har Kraft at staa,
faar falde.

Stormen, den store Opriver og Forskrækker, raser udenom mig. Jeg
kender ingen Angst, jeg ler den op i Ansigtet: Du skræmmer mig ikke,
Du naaer mig ikke, Du havde din Klo i mig, men jeg undslap Dig.

Og i lykkeligt Overmod velsigner jeg Stormen. Den blæser Efteraaret
ind, den dejlige Tid, hvor der bliver endnu mere stille paa
Vejrbakken; den Tid, hvor Vejrbakken vil tilhøre kun Grethe og mig.

Iaftes, da jeg forlod Møllerhuset og hun fulgte mig til Dørs,
sagde hun: »Ser De, nu er Himlen fuld af Efteraar. Nu drager Syden
Trækfuglene, nu længes Hovedstadsfolk bort fra de stille Steder.
Begynder ikke ogsaa De at længes?«

»Og hvis jeg rejste,« spurgte jeg, »vilde De føle det som et Savn?«

Hendes Øjne duggedes, mens de saa' ind i mine og hun svarede: »Jeg
synes, det maa være saa forfærdeligt at skulle sige Farvel. Hvis De
rejser, saa lov mig, at De gør det uden Afsked.«

»Jeg rejser ikke, før _De_ siger Farvel.«

Og jeg skyndte mig bort i det frembrydende Uvejr, men da jeg, henne
ved Skoven, vendte mig, stod hun endnu i Døren og saa' efter mig.


                                                  _7. September._

Hvorfor siger jeg hende ikke, at jeg elsker hende? Er det af Frygt
for, at det skulde bedrøve eller mishage hende? Visselig ikke. Af
tusind Smaating har hun forstaaet, hvor kær og dyrebar hun er mig;
for hver Dag ser hun, uden at jeg behøver at sige det, hvordan min
Kærlighed tager Vækst. Hun sér det, med Smil i sit Blik, med fagre
Roser paa Kind.

Jeg taler ikke, fordi jeg ikke nænner at forstyrre vore Sjæles Møde
i den trygge Ventens Tysthed. Fordi jeg føler mig til Mode, som sad
vi Haand i Haand og lyttede til en dæmpet Sang ude over Vandet en
yndig Skærsommernat.




XIX.


                                       _Slutningen af September._

Det er Frugthøstens Tid. I Møllerens Have gaar Arbejdet muntert og
travlt.

Paa den lille Plæne mellem alle de bugnende Træer, midt i
Travlheden, sidder Mølleren i en Lænestol og leder, trods sin
Blindhed, Arbejdet. Han kender alle Træer i Haven og udpeger dem
i den Rækkefølge, de skal høstes; han giver Ordre om, hvordan
Plukningen for hvert enkelt Træs Vedkommende skal foregaa, og
han modtager Kurvene, efterhaanden som de fyldes, til kyndig
Undersøgelse og Prøvelse.

Grethe fører Tilsyn med Plukningen, hvortil er lejede et Par Piger
og Karle; hun tager selv Del i Arbejdet og hun sætter ogsaa mig i
Beskæftigelse. Hun og jeg besørger de fine Frugter, der vokser paa
glasdækkede Espalierer og som maa behandles med særlig Varsomhed.
Jeg staar paa en Stige og plukker dem, hun nedenfor med udbredt
Forklæde. Men ofte maa hun skænde paa mig for min Dovenskab; thi
det hænder hvert Øjeblik, naar jeg skal række hende Frugten, at jeg
fortaber mig i Beskuelsen af hendes ivrigt blussende Ansigt, der
er skønnere end nogen Frugt. Og hvad hjælper det, hun skænder? Hun
bliver kun dobbelt sød i sin skrømtede Utaalmodighed.

-- -- -- Naar Duggen begynder at falde, standses Plukningen og
Kurvene bæres ind i Frugtkamrene, der har Hylder fra Gulv til Loft,
og hvor Grethe forestaar Sorteringens vigtige og vanskelige Arbejde:
hvad der tør sendes til Hovedstadens kræsne, men højtbetalende
Frugthandlere, hvad Prangerne kan faa overladt til en billig Penge,
hvad der egner sig til Syltning og Henkogning og hvad endelig der
skal forbeholdes Husets Vinterforbrug.

Som der dufter her i disse Frugtkamre. Alle de syrlige og søde Aande
fra Kurve og Hylder fortættes i de indelukkede Rum og blander sig
til en berusende Essens, der længe hænger i Ens Klæder.

Og saa prægtig Grethe ser ud, som hun, med Kjoleærmerne smøgede op
om de hvide stærke Arme, tager i de solbrændte Hænder Frugt paa
Frugt og med hastig Kendermine tildeler hver sin Plads og Rang.

Helst tænker jeg dog paa hende, som jeg saa' hende nedenfor Stigen
ved Espalieret. Hvis jeg skrev Vers, vilde jeg sætte Billedet i Digt:

»Det er Frugthøstens Tid. I Møllerens Have paa den golde Vejrbakke
modnes den ædleste Frugt i Landet. I Møllerens Have staar hans
Datter, den højbarmede Mø, med Favnen fuld af svulmende Druer.«




XX.


                                                       _Oktober._

I Kildehaven, der ligger mellem Byen og Vejrbakken, har de smaa
Børn deres Park. Naar Vejret er godt, føres de, kørende i deres
Vugge-Kareter eller trippende paa deres stumpede Ben, herud af
Mødre, Ammer og Barnepiger. En stor Runddel, skærmet af store
Træer og omgiven af lange Bænke, er Samlingsstedet. Her findes en
Træbod, hvorfra sælges Mælk og Smaakager, Lakris, Johannesbrød og
fristende rødstribede Brystsukkerstænger. Men midt paa Pladsen staar
en broncebarsk Statue af en fædrelandsk Helt og ser med uanfægtet
Krigeriskhed paa Børnenes Leg.

Paa vor Vej til Byen gaar Grethe og jeg gærne gennem Kildehaven. For
mig er det en Opfriskelse af mine spædeste Minder, fra den Gang
jeg var et saa bevægeligt Gemyt, at jeg i Arrigskab rakte Tunge ad
Blæsten og græd af Angst, naar min Barnepige, efter den almindelige
respektløse Sædvane i Kildehaven, lod mig forrette mine nødtørftige
Smaaærinder ved Foden af den strænge General. Først og fremmest
nyder jeg dog Grethes Henrykkelse over de Smaa. Med straalende
Øjne følger hun deres yndefuldt-kejtede Tumlen og finder dem lige
bedaarende, enten de leende pludrer eller pludselig stikker i en
fortvivlet Brølen. Men allermest elsker hun de ganske Smaa, dem,
der ligger i Vognene og kigger ud i Verden med store forundrede
Øjne. Det hændte idag, at vi saa' en ung Moder tage saadan En op af
Puderne og lægge den til sit store hvide Bryst, som den sugede sig
fast til med graadig Mund og greb om med smaa ivrige Hænder. Med øm,
andagtsfuld Tilbedelse fortabte Grethes Blik sig i dette Billede, og
da hun endelig rev sig løs og vi gik bort, saa' jeg, at hun havde
Taarer i Øjnene.

-- -- Vi talte siden om hendes Kærlighed til Børn. Hun sagde:

»Mit højeste Ønske er at blive Moder til mange Børn og bo paa
Vejrbakken, hvor der er Plads til at tumle med dem. Jeg kunde ikke
forestille mig at være gift, selv om jeg elskede min Mand aldrig
saa højt, uden at have Børn. Kan noget tænkes skønnere for en
Kvinde end at give den Mand, hun elsker, Børn? Kan noget tænkes
dejligere end at blive kaldt Moder? Vide og føle, ja høre paa den
Klang, hvormed Ordet bliver sagt, at man ikke lever forgæves,
men at der er Nogen, som saa nødvendigt trænger til En? Min Mand
skulde intet tabe ved den Ømhed, jeg ofrede vore Børn. Jeg vilde
elske ham dobbelt som deres Fader. Men fordi jeg føler det saadan,
forstaar jeg ikke, ja forskrækkes af de unge Kvinder, hvorom jeg
læser i moderne Bøger. Det er jo næsten, som de frygtede Børn
som en Fare for deres Lykke. Og ikke nok med det. De klynker og
jamrer ovenikøbet over den Naturens Grusomhed, der lader dem føde i
Smerte. Som om ikke de fik tifold Vederlag for selv den pinefuldeste
Kvide, naar de holder Barnet i deres Arme. Som om overhovedet det
at blive Moder var noget værd, naar det ikke kostede Smerte! --
Jeg tænkte først: det er Mændene, der i blødagtig Medynk skriver
saa taabeligt om noget, de ikke forstaar. Men jeg læste siden det
samme i langt stærkere Ord i Bøger, skrevne af Kvinder, som hævder
at tale Kvindernes Sag. Disse kvindelige Forfattere, Hustruer og
Mødre ofte, er ligefrem fornærmede over, at alene Kvinden skal være
Moder og at Moderpligterne afholder dem fra Deltagelse i vigtigere
Samfundsopgaver. Jeg forstaar ikke de Kvinder, jeg forfærdes over
dem. Jeg ser dem for mig med Ansigter fortrukne af Oprør mod
Naturen. Jeg bliver syg af at læse deres Bøger. Jeg føler det, som
om der blev myrdet smaa Børn inde i mig.«

Men, efter en Pavse, tilføjede Grethe: »Ser De, jeg tror nok, det
har gjort meget, at jeg mistede min Moder saa tidligt. Al den
utilfredsstillede Trang, jeg havde til Moder-Ømhed, har givet min
Moder-Trang Vækst. Jeg, der ikke mindes, hvordan det er at sidde paa
Mo'rs Skød, kunde alt som lille Pige ikke se et Barn, uden at mine
Arme længtes efter at favne det og lægge det op til mig.«

Saaledes talte den Moderløse til den Moderløse. Og mens jeg saa'
paa hendes frodige Legeme, dér hun gik stolt og ren i sin frimodige
Bekendelse, tænkte jeg, at bedre Lykke kunde jeg ikke give min Søn
end at lade ham fødes af denne Kvinde.




XXI.


                                                       _Oktober._

Vi standser foran et langt lavt skiddengult Hus i en snæver
Sidegyde. I hvert af Vinduerne, der ligger nær Jorden, sidder bag
Geranier og Gyldenlakker en gammel Kvinde med et kulørt strikket
Tørklæde om Skuldrene.

»I dette Hus -- fortæller jeg Grethe -- bor saadanne gamle fattige
Kvinder, der ikke er fine nok til at komme i Stiftelsen. Huset
bestaar af en eneste lang Stue, afdelt ved Sirtses-Forhæng i tyve
Rum, ti paa hver Side. I hver Baas bor en gammel Kvinde. I min
Barndom hed en af dem Ane Marie. Hun er den eneste, hvem jeg har
arvet.

Ane Marie var en brystsvag Sypige. Hvor gammel hun var, véd jeg
ikke; uden Tvivl dog temmelig til Aars, siden hun havde faaet Plads
i de veldædige Baase. Hun bevarede imidlertid saa sent, jeg husker
hende, et fuldstændigt Barneansigt, glat og fint med to troskyldige,
altid smilende brune Øjne. Af Person var hun det klejneste, jeg har
sét. Hun listede som en lille beskeden Skygge ned ad Gaden med sin
Bondehue paa Hovedet og det grønne uldne Sjal viklet om de spinkle
Skuldre. Her i Huset havde hun frit Logis, men forresten maatte hun
ernære sig selv. Det gjorde hun ved at sy hos Folk i Byen, hun havde
sin Dag hver Uge hos seks Familjer. Nogen vidtdreven Færdighed i
Sykunsten besad Ane Marie ikke. Men at lappe og stoppe forstod hun
som ingen anden; der var aldrig et Stykke Linned eller Uldtøj saa
laset, at hun ikke fandt det for godt til at kasseres. De barnrige
Familjer, der ydede hende hendes Underhold, var da ikke narrede med
hende, navnlig da hun ikke kunde beskyldes for at trække dem op.
Hendes Gage, den hun bestemt afslog at faa forhøjet -- hun fandt
den i alle Maader rundelig -- var seks Skilling pr. Dag. Men saa
havde hun jo rigtignok tillige det meste af Kosten. Og med Hensyn
til Kosten blev der kræset for Ane Marie, hvor hun kom. Familjerne
sørgede altid for at have hendes Livretter til hende, hvad der
ejheller var økonomisk uoverkommeligt for Husmoderen og gjorde
hendes Besøg dobbelt kært for os Børn; thi Ane Marie havde ogsaa
i sin Smag bevaret en afgjort Barnlighed. Skulde hun have nævnet
den Diner, der mest fristede hende, vilde hun uden Betænkning have
svaret: Sødsuppe og Pandekager. Fra min tidligste Barndom, til vi
rejste fra Byen, kom Ane Marie hver Torsdag hjemme hos os. Lignede
hun paa Gaden en Skygge, blev hun i Stuen en mild lille Solstraale.
Hun var altid fornøjet, altid opfyldt af, hvor godt hun havde det og
hvor gode Folk var imod hende, smilede altid taknemmeligt ud af sine
brune Barneøjne. Men meddelsom blev hun først, naar hun var alene
med os Børn. De Voksne skræmmede hende en Smule med deres Fornuft
og Alvor. Sammen med Børn følte hun sig i sit Es. Deres smaa Sorger
og Glæder forstod hun, som det var hendes egne. Deres Forestillinger
og Interesser var ogsaa hendes. Hele Eftermiddagen, naar vi var
komne fra Skole, sad vi inde hos hende i den lille Strygestue og
passiarede lunt og godt som med en jævnaldrende Kammerat. -- Men da
Afskedens Stund oprandt og vi rejste fra Byen, stod hun ved Skibet
og græd, som skulde hendes Hjærte briste.

Hun glemte ikke sine smaa Venner.

Aarene gik, jeg var allerede en stor Dreng med første Del af Artium,
da der, just som Eksamen var overstaaet, kom Brev om, at Ane Marie,
hvem jeg i Barndommens Letsindighed ikke ofte havde skænket nogen
mindende Tanke, var død og havde indsat mig og en Broder samt to
Børn i en anden Familje til sine Arvinger. Den efterladte Kapital
var 50 Rigsdaler til lige Deling, 12½ Daler til hver Arving.
50 Rigsdaler, det vilde for Ane Marie sige 800 Arbejdsdages
Fortjeneste samlet sammen, Seksskilling paa Seksskilling.

Jeg rejste min Arv op. For Ane Maries Seksskillinger gjorde jeg en
dejlig fjorten Dages Fodtur efter den overstandne Eksamen.

-- -- Og derfor, Grethe, kommer Taarer mig i Øjnene, naar jeg ser
paa dette fattige Hus, hvor der sidder gamle Kvinder i Vinduerne bag
Geranier og Gyldenlakker.«




XXII.


                                                      _November._

Min Veninde i Stiftelsen er Grethes og min eneste Omgang. Vi
havde hende for nogen Tid siden til Chokoladegilde paa min
Vejrbakke-Kvist. Hun blev hentet i Droske, fik Flødeskum paa
Chokoladen og, da hun atter steg ind i sin Ekvipage, en Kurv med
Æbler og Pærer samt nogle smaa Glas Syltetøj, som Grethe havde bragt
med til hende. Hun blev kort sagt, som hun selv sagde, behandlet
akkurat som en Prinsesse i et af de Æventyr, hun digtede til mig, da
jeg var Barn.

Men ogsaa vi har besøgt hende og været hendes fejrede Gæster.

Grethe har ganske erobret min Veninde, der vist vilde have
Vanskelighed ved at afgøre, for hvem af os, Grethe eller mig, hendes
gamle Hjærte banker stærkest. Det forvirrer og ærgrer hende lidt,
at vi ikke er forlovede; men hun har aabenbart ikke opgivet Haabet
om, at det kan komme. Naar vi besøger hende, trækker hun snart mig,
snart Grethe afsides og fortaber sig i blomstrende Lovprisninger:
af Grethe overfor mig og omvendt. Til mig er det stadige Omkvæd:
»Er hun nu ikke yndig? Har han nogensinde set Mage til gudvelsignet
Pigebarn? Blusser hun ikke af lutterste Hjærtensgodhed? Og sikke
Øjnene skinner, naar hun ser paa ham! Ja, det kan da Enhver opdage
med et vindt Øje, at hun har en Klat tilovers for ham.«

-- -- Igaar var vi til stor Kaffestads hos hende. Til hendes Sorg
fik hun ikke Lov at invitere Præsten, hun maatte indskrænke sig til
at hædre os med nogle af Stiftelsens fornemste Damer; men forøvrigt
forløb Festen paa bedste Maade. Beværtningen var kongelig:
Kaffekedlen gik ikke af Kog og Tallerkenen med Wienerbrød tømtes
aldrig saasnart, før den fyldtes igen. Og Samtalen kunde ikke være
livligere. I samme Nu, den ene Dame afsluttede Beretningen om sine
Skrøbeligheder og Genvordigheder, tog den næste fat. Tilsidst vilde
min Veninde absolut lægge Kabaler for mig og Grethe, de andre gamle
Damer brændte af Iver efter at overvære den spændende Forestilling;
men Grethe, der kendte Kabalens Hensigt og af tidligere Erfaring
vidste, at min Veninde altid lod den »pusle i Hjærtersiden«
med »lønlige Bud« og en »sukkende Ven« og alt andet til Faget
henhørende, ønskede, tydeligt nok, at blive forskaanet i dette
større Selskab af Kirsten Gifteknive.

Med et taknemmeligt Blik modtog hun derfor mit Forslag om, at vi
skulde lade Kabalen hvile til en anden Dag og at hun istedetfor
skulde ende Festen med at synge nogle af sine Smaasange nede i
Spindestuen for alle de Gamle.

-- -- I Spindestuen har de Gamle deres Rokke, og mens Rokkehjulene
snurrer, gaar Passiaren rapt om Stiftelsens Anliggender. Men
Spindestuen gør tillige Tjeneste som Bedesal. Som Følge deraf er den
udstyret med et Harmonium.

Der er gaaet Bud ud om den forestaaende Begivenhed, og da vi træder
ind i Spindestuen, anførte af min Veninde, der føler sig mindst som
Direktrice for det store Operateater, er Salen fuld. Med hastigt
anlagte Søndagskapper sidder de gamle Kvinder og virrer saa benauet
og andægtigt, som om de skulde til Alters. Rank og frodig, i lys og
fager Ungdom staar Grethe midt blandt dem: et skinnende Birketræ,
der er skudt op i et udgaaende Krats forvitrede og forkrøblede
Rester. Men alle de rynkede og indfaldne Gamle fornemmer, da de ser
hende, et Genskin af Vaar i deres Hjærter, og i beundrende Mumlen
bølger de virrende Kappe-Hoveder sammen.

Der bliver atter dødsensstille: Grethe har sat sig ved Harmoniet,
slaar en Melodi an ... saa synger hun. Luften i den lave overfyldte
Sal er tyk og tung. Tonerne risler dugklare gennem den, stiger som
kvidrende Fugle, blinker i muntre Solstraaler, spreder sig med Duft
af Skov og Mark, hvælver et blaanende Højenloft over det fattige Rum
og de gamle Kvinder. Det er de sødt smægtende, fromt skælmske Sange
fra vore Mødres og Bedstemødres unge Dage, Grethe synger. De Gamle
lytter, disse Toner faar længe hvilende Strænge i dem til at bæve,
forsigtigt prøver de sig frem, efterhaanden mimrer alle de gamle
Munde og nikker alle de krusede Kapper i Takt med Grethes Sang.
Viserne om Elskovs Fryd og Elskovs Smerte er dog dem, der finder den
modtageligste Sangbund. For hvert Kys i Lunden paa Pigemunden glider
der et lykkeligt Smil over de rynkede Ansigter; men naar Taaren
rinder paa blege Kinder, staar et halvthundred Par gamle rødrandede
Øjne i Vand.

Jeg sidder længst tilbage i Stuen sammen med min Veninde. Hun, der
ellers ikke fattes Ord, er saa bevæget, at hun ikke kan tale. Men
hun klapper ustandseligt min Haand. Og da Grethe omsider rejser sig
fra Instrumentet og omringes af takkende og haandkyssende og nejende
og velsignende Gamle, siger min Veninde de Ord, som jeg kunde have
kysset hende for: »Aa nej da. Saa lyslevende som hun ligner hans
salig Mo'r.«




XXIII.


                                                      _December._

Jeg gaar med Grethe til min Moders Grav.

Der er vintermørkt paa Kirkegaarden. I den sorte Dødens Have lysner
kun de nøgne hvide Kors. Det har nylig regnet og vi træder lydløst
paa det faldne Løv.

Døden bliver større og mægtigere i sin Vinterdragt. Ved Sommertid
dækkes dens sælsomme Gru af brogede Blomster og smilende Løv. Vi
søger at gøre Døden mild og god med Sommerens rige Offergaver. Men
om Vinteren rejser den sig i sin strænge Majestæt, breder ud sin
Kappe saa sort og fæster sit Benrads-Mærke paa hvert Kirkegaardens
Træ.

Jeg gaar med Grethe over den vintermørke Kirkegaard, og Dødens Gru
forskrækker mig ikke. Jeg gaar i Pagt med Livets gode Herre; jeg
synes, Døden viger, dér vi skrider frem.

Vi sidder ved Graven, og Grethe siger: »Saa ofte De har talt til mig
om Deres Moder, har De aldrig fortalt mig, hvordan hun saa' ud. De
var dog den Gang, hun døde, ikke mindre end at De maa have modtaget
et bestemt Indtryk af hende.«

»Det Billede af min Moder, jeg tydeligst bevarer i min Erindring,
er ikke fra hendes allersidste Leveaar. Det er fra Tiden, før
Sygdom blegnede hende; fra den Tid, hun endnu var ung og smuk eller
syntes mig at være det. Jeg ser hende midt paa en Plæne i en Have
en dejlig Sommerdag. Hun stod mellem os Børn, der legede om hende,
med et let Sjal yndefuldt draperet om Skuldrene. Jeg mindes aldrig
at have set en Kvinde, der kunde bære et Sjal saa smukt. En stor
Havehat indrammede hendes Ansigts fine Oval, og det mørke Haar
laa glat ned over hendes Pande, en Pande saa klar og hvid. Med
straalende Øjne stod hun i sin legende Børneflok. Da pludselig sad
der en Kanariefugl paa hendes Skulder. En flygtende Fugl, der søgte
Hvile hos hende. Tyssende løftede hun Haanden. En Stund blev Fuglen
siddende, strøg saa kælent sit Næb mod hendes Kind og fløj.«

Jeg tager Grethes Haand, der hviler i hendes Skød: »Ja, Grethe,
saadan mindes jeg min Moder. Men vil De vide mere, da spørg vor
gamle Veninde i Stiftelsen. Hun siger, og jeg kan ikke tvivle om, at
hun har Ret, at De er hendes lyslevende Billed.«

Grethe ser op paa mig med store, kærlige Øjne. Og jeg føler hendes
Arme om min Hals og hendes Læber mod mine. Saa staar vi længe, Arm i
Arm, i stille Andagt foran Moders Grav.

-- -- Men da vi gaar hjemad til Vejrbakken, spørger jeg: »Fortæl
mig, hvordan det gik til, at Du kom til at holde af mig?« Hun
svarer: »Jeg forstod, at Du trængte til mig, og fra samme Stund
havde Du mit Hjærte.«

Siden siger hun: »Lov mig, at Du, naar jeg dør, vil begrave mig tæt
ved din Moder. Min egen Moders Grav er paa et fremmed Sted, og jeg
vil ikke langt bort fra Vejrbakken. Jeg vil ogsaa, at Du skal finde
din Moder og mig sammen.« Men da hun ser, at hendes Ord gør mig
sørgmodig, tilføjer hun smilende: »Du taabelige Mand, tror Du, jeg
tænker paa at dø? Jeg har ingensinde velsignet Livet højere end nu.«




XXIV.


                                                      _December._

Altid tilforn, naar jeg opnaaede noget, jeg kaldte en Lykke, og jeg
ransagede mit Hjærte, om Lykken nu ogsaa virkelig boede i det, fandt
jeg i en eller anden Krog det saare Punkt, hvor Tvivlens Orm gnavede
fordulgt bag Blomsterdækket. Og jeg har vidst, at der vilde komme
det Øjeblik, før eller senere, hvor Pragten falmede.

Tvivlen er nøjsom. Et uroligt Blik, et uoverlagt Ord giver den
Næring. Du sidder en Aftenstund med din Elskede. Da pludselig ser Du
hendes Øje sløres af en fremmed Tanke, et fremmed Minde. Du spørger,
og hun svarer med et aandsfraværende Smil et ligegyldigt Ord. Det
er kun et Nu. Hun glemmer det; og Du glemmer det, mens hun holder
Dig i sine Arme. Men naar den ensomme Nat kommer, stiger frem i din
Sjæl Billedet af din Elskede med Øjne som kolde Løgne og med et
Smil, hvis Spot stivner dit Hjærte. Hvad hjælper det saa, at hun den
næste Dag møder Dig mere øm end nogensinde? Du kan tro Dig frelst en
Dag, en Uge, Maaneder. Ormen har sat sin giftige Tunge i din Lykke.
Du er dens Bytte.

Der er dem, som i arm Blindhed slaar sig tiltaals med den kranke
Lykke. Der er andre, som i indbildsk Trods siger: Tryghed dræber
Lykken.

Der er kun én Lykke: at hvile i Lykken. At vide, at Dagen, der
kommer, rinder op med den samme Sol, der svandt igaar. Intet mere at
begære, intet mere at frygte. Ingen Dag at ønske om igen, ingen Dag
at ønske anderledes, fordi hver Dag er éns lykkelig.

Den Lykke, den eneste, er min.

Saagodt som Nogen har jeg jaget den. Har søgt den ude i den Verden,
hvor man gør sin Lykke. Været tidlig oppe og silde ude for at finde
den, har hidset mig op og trættet mig ud i dens Forfølgelse.

Og saa dalede den nedover mig som en stille Sang paa et fjærnt og
stille Sted. Jeg hørte den klinge dæmpet ude fra Vandet en dejlig
Skærsommernat. Jeg turde ikke kalde paa den, jeg frygtede at skræmme
den bort. Jeg aabnede den blot i ydmyg Tro mit Hjærte. Og se, en Dag
sang Lykken derinde.

-- -- Jeg har ransaget mit Hjærte, der skjuler sig ingen Tvivl i
det. Jeg har vaaget ensomme Nætter, ingen Skygge forvanskede Grethes
hulde Billed.

Jeg glider i en hvid Baad nedad en solbeskinnet Flod, og jeg holder
en gylden Frugt, hel og rund, i min Haand.




XXV.


                                                       _Julenat._

Da jeg i Eftermiddag kommer op til Møllen, ser jeg, at der er to
Jule-Gæster foruden mig. Det er Grethes Guddatter, den fireaarige
Asta, og hendes toaarige Broder Carl, Børn af en Fisker nede ved
Fjorden, der i sin Tid var Dreng paa Møllen. De skal for første
Gang til Juletræ. I den Anledning skinner de af nyvasket Pyntethed
og betuttet Artighed. Og da de ser mig, den fremmede Mand, søger de
en forsigtig Dækstilling bag Grethe, der maa hale dem frem og ruske
dem op for at faa dem foreviste i al deres Dejlighed. Dejlige er
de: Asta en livagtig Englebarnsmodel, lige til at sætte i Toppen af
et Juletræ, kælen og indsmigrende, med gul krøllet Top og store
lyseblaa Øjne; Carl en tæt Prop, sømands-mut og mandfolkevigtig og
med brune Øjne, der blinker af lunt Humør.

Julenadveren er endt og vi gaar ind i Havestuen, hvor Træet er
tændt. Grethe har Purken paa Armen og Asta holder hende i Haanden.
Bagefter kommer Mølleren og jeg med vore Piber. Børnene er straks
helt stumme af Forbavselse; med opspilede Øjne stirrer de frem for
sig, mens Grethe dansende fører dem rundt om Træet. Jeg hvisker til
hende: »Jeg tror, Du er den gladeste af Jer tre.« »Ja,« svarer hun,
»tænk at holde Jul med Dig og saadanne to.«

Det varer dog ikke længe, før Børnene frimodigt giver sig hen i
Fryd. Og da de opdager, at Herlighederne paa Træet er Frugter, som
tør plukkes, bliver de rent ellevilde. Tilsidst ruller de rundt paa
Gulvet som to Kattekillinger mellem alle deres Skatte og fylder den
ellers saa stille Stue med klukkende Latter og ivrig Pludren. Indtil
de bliver trætte og søvnige og med bittesmaa glippende Øjne bæres
om til Godnat. Men da Grethe har lagt dem til Sengs, kommer hun ind
og sætter sig i Sofaen mellem sin Fader og mig.

Endnu brænder Lysene paa Træet, og den Gamle siger: »Der maa være
flere Lys iaar. Sidst var der mørkt foran mig, men iaar synes jeg,
jeg skimter et Lysskær.«

»Ja, lille Fa'r«, svarer Grethe og bøjer sit Hoved op til hans
Skulder, »der er ogsaa flere Lys iaar. Sidst var Du og jeg ene. Jeg
vilde ikke for min Skyld tænde de mange Lys. Men denne Juleaften har
Vejrbakken haft Børn og rigtig Julefest. Og saadan vil det være hver
Juleaften herefter, for han her« -- hun tager min Haand og lægger
den i den Gamles -- »han bliver hos os ... hvis Du giver ham og mig
Lov til det.«

Den Gamle kysser Grethe, trykker fast min Haand, og, mens to store
Taarer pibler frem af hans blinde Øjne, siger han: »Gud velsigne
Jer, Børn, og give Jer lyse Dage paa Vejrbakken. Dem, min Søn, har
jeg jo aldrig set, faar Dem aldrig at se. Men paa Deres Stemme,
naar vi talte om Grethe, har jeg hørt, at De holdt af hende.«

-- -- Før jeg gaar, fører Grethe mig ind i sit Sovekammer, hvor
Asta og Carl hviler i hendes gamle Barneseng, slumrende trygt i
hinandens Arme, mens Asta moderligt har lagt den lille Broder op til
sit Bryst. Forsigtigt lister vi os hen og kysser dem. De vaagner
ikke, men smiler, som de i Søvne følte den Kærlighed, der staar ved
deres Leje. Saa kysser Grethe mig og siger: »Tænk, hvor vidunderlig
dejligt, om det var vore egne!«

       *       *       *       *       *

Grethe følger mig ud paa Bakken. Det er den skønneste stjærneklare
Frostnat. Vi staar paa Bakkekammen ud mod Fjorden. Til Højre for os
skraaner den hvide Skov; det er saa stille, at vi hører det, naar en
Kvist knækker i Frosten. Foran, dybt under os, ligger den isdækkede
Fjord og Byen, hvor der skinner Julelys i alle Huse.

»Nu er der Fred paa Jorden,« hvisker Grethe. »Ja, og Fred i
Menneskenes Hjærter,« svarer jeg.

Men da vi vender os om, staar Møllen med sine store sorte Vinger
lige for os. Jeg mærker en Gysen gennemfare Grethe og jeg spørger:
»Blev Du bange for Møllen?«

»Nej,« siger hun, »jeg var blot kommen til at fryse af at staa
saalænge.«




XXVI.


                                                    _Nytaarstid._

Frost og Sne har lukket af for den gamle By. I mange Dage er intet
Bud fra Omverdenen trængt ind til den. Men da Proviant forefindes i
rigelig Mængde og det tilmed er Ferietid, føler Byen ingen Uhygge
som indespærret Fæstning. Den lever blot saameget stærkere sit eget
Liv, den samler som en Høne Kyllingerne under sine lune Vinger; den
glemmer, at den er ifærd med at udvikle sig til en udadstræbende
Fremtidsby med Bank og Eksportforeninger; den bliver atter helt og
ganske den gamle By.

Naar jeg møder de ringlende Kanetog med lystige pelsindhyllede unge
Herrer og Damer; naar jeg hører den skingrende Jubel og den leende
Hvinen fra Børnene, der kjælker ned ad Vejrbakkens Sneskraaninger;
naar jeg ser Fjorden sort af farende Skøjteløbere og naar om Aftenen
Sang og Dansemusik toner bag de festligt oplyste Vinduer -- da
mindes jeg hin strænge Vinter for mange Aar siden, da Byen, efter
møjsommeligt at have gravet sig op af Sneen, drog ud paa Fjorden og
holdt Karneval Uger igennem.

Saa fantastisk det staar for min Erindring:

Gennem en Granport kommer man ind i en lang Isgade, der ligger lunt
mellem høje Snemure. Saa pludselig er man paa en stor aaben Plads,
der straaler i Fakkellys og indhegnes af Telte, illuminerede med
kulørte Lamper. Telte, hvor der spises og drikkes, synges og danses.
Og fra Pladsen skærer nye Gader sig ind i Snebjærgene. Man kommer
forbi Huler i magisk Blaalysskær, Snemænd med funklende Ildøjne,
Smaaboder, hvor gamle Kællinger i Tranlampe-Belysning braser Aal og
Pandekager, et Varmeskur, der benævnes den gloende Ovn, og man naaer
ind i en Lund af Grantræer, hvor der er Trængsel om en Karrusel
med Slæder, der har den oplivende Egenskab, at den i hver Omgang
lader en Slæde vende Koldbøtte i en Drive. Snebyen forgrener og
breder sig endnu videre. Vi Børn naaer aldrig til dens Ende, thi der
gaar Rygter om megen Vildskab og uhyggelige Slagsmaal i dens fjærne
mørke Forstæder, dér den gamle Bys Svende og Lærlinge mødes med de
fjendlig sindede Folk fra den anden Side Fjorden. Vi bliver, hvor
Lyset hersker og Uskylden boer. Hvor vore Søstre og deres Veninder
farer os forbi i susende Fart med deres Kavallerer eller opfører en
ikke altid saa vellykket, men des muntrere Skøjte-Lanciers. Henad
Aftensmad-Tid er hele Byen paa Fjorden. Saa kommer Mødre og Fædre
for at hente de unge Døtre og Børnene, eller de bringer Maden med
i Kurve. Inde i den gloende Ovn slaar man sig da sammen, Venner
og Bekendte, og dækker et Fællesbord med de forskellige Madkurves
Herligheder. Og naar man bagefter vandrer hjemad, stiger Raketter
op over Fjorden, hvor den summende Karnevalstummel først forstummer
sent paa Natten.

       *       *       *       *       *

Grethe og jeg var i Formiddags en Kanetur. Nede ved Fjorden gjorde
vi Holdt og gik ud paa Isen mellem Skøjteløberne. Der var Liv og
Glæde, men ikke det Æventyr-Sceneri som i gamle Dage. Jeg følte
mig maaske en Kende skuffet over den glatte velfejede Bane og hele
det ordnede sportsmæssige Præg, Forlystelsen havde faaet; saameget
ivrigere fortabte jeg mig i Genopfriskelsen af de gamle Minder.
Først sent opdagede jeg, at Grethe, den ellers saa ligelige, gik
ganske tavs og med et forpint Udtryk i Øjnene af fjærntskuende
Sørgmod. Bekymret spurgte jeg, hvad hende fattedes.

»Min egen Ven«, sagde hun, »tilgiv mig. Det er slet intet uden
Barnagtighed. Mens vi gik her blandt alle disse Mennesker, der
ligesom jager hæsblæsende efter Glæden, overfaldt der mig en Angst
for at miste Dig. Jeg syntes, de vilde rive Dig fra mig. Jeg
syntes, din Tale hastede bort med dem, saa langt, langt bort. Tilgiv
mig. Husk, hvor lidet jeg er vant at færdes blandt Mange. Husk, det
er første Gang, vi har forladt de stille Steder.«

Hun smiler atter til mig, hun trykker ømt min Arm. Men jeg fører
hende hastigt bort fra Skøjteløbernes Bane; vi stiger op i den
ventende Kane, og vi vender tilbage til de stille Steder.




XXVII.


                                                     _7. Januar._

Idag kom der Slædepost. Den bragte mig et Brev fra min Forlægger,
der drilsk spørger, om jeg ikke snart er ked af mit Eneboerliv og
om det ikke kunde friste mig til en Tilbagevenden at blive Leder af
et stort literært Foretagende, som han paatænker. De Vilkaar, han
kunde byde, er saa gode, at jeg foreløbig ikke behøvede at frygte
økonomiske Vanskeligheder.

For nogle Maaneder siden vilde jeg maaske have vaklet. Nu behøver
mit Svar ingen Overvejelse. Jeg dypper straks min Pen og skriver:
At jeg ikke kan modtage hans venlige Tilbud, fordi jeg heroppe
er bleven det lykkeligste Menneske i Verden og fordi min Lykke
er bunden til denne Plet Jord. At jeg saaledes uigenkaldelig har
opgivet enhver Tanke om at vende tilbage og at min Deltagelse i
det literære og offenlige Liv maa indskrænke sig til de Bøger,
jeg skriver. At den Bog, han venter, snart kommer og at den vil
efterfølges af andre, der ligner mine tidligere ligesaa lidt. At jeg
har taget Stade paa Vejrbakken, hvor Luften er klar og ren; hvor
Livets Mening bliver lettere at fatte, Lidenskaben mere usammensat,
Følelsen dybere. Endelig, at min Lykke er saa sikker, at den trænger
hverken til Anger eller Anklage; at den tværtimod har Raad til Tak
for alt forbigangent, fordi den uden det ikke vilde været saa stor.

Inden jeg afsender mit Svar, viser jeg Grethe Brevet fra
Forlæggeren. Da hun har læst det, siger hun, efter et Øjebliks
Tavshed:

»Jeg faar nu Anledning til at sige Dig noget, jeg har tænkt paa
stadig siden hin Dag paa Isen. Jeg tør ikke holde Dig tilbage. Du
kan for en kort Stund trives her; før eller senere vil alt det, Du
kom fra, atter kalde Dig. Jeg finder det kun rigtigt og naturligt.
Og derfor skal Du vide, at jeg intet Baand lægger paa Dig. Gør, som
Du vil og maa. Gør med mig, hvad Du vil. Lad mig blive her, om Du
maaske frygter mig som en Hæmsko, hvad Du har Grund til efter min
dumme Adfærd forleden. Eller tag mig med, om Du mener at have nogen
Brug for mig og om Du tør tro mig paa mit Ord, at jeg er grundig
kureret for min Dumhed. Jeg følger Dig, hvorhen Du vil. Vejrbakken
var hidtil mit Hjem. Uden Dig vil jeg være hjemløs paa Vejrbakken.
Livet og Verden derude skræmmede mig. Sammen med Dig vil jeg ingen
Frygt føle. Og siger Du, at jeg maa blive her for Faders Skyld, saa
svarer jeg: Det er ikke Fader mest, som ikke har villet herfra. Til
Tider tror jeg endog, han gærne rejste. Maaske var det ogsaa bedre
for ham. Han er gammel, hans Sind plages ofte i den sidste Tid af
sære Tanker deroppe i Stilheden. Han ligesom frygter Møllen, han
tror, den kalder paa ham; at den bebrejder ham, at han har standset
den. Mod min Fader gør vi ingen Uret ved at rejse. -- Men vil Du, at
jeg skal blive her og vente paa Dig, da er ogsaa det godt. Maaske
synes Du, at Du helst en Tid maa være ene og prøve dit Hjærte: om
det nu ikke blot var her i Ensomheden, at Du trængte til mig. Alt,
hvad Du bestemmer, alt, hvad Du gør med mig, er godt. Thi jeg elsker
Dig.«

Jeg lader Grethe tale til Ende. Var det haardt og stygt af mig, min
søde Veninde? Var det egenkærlig grusomt, at min Sjæl intet vilde
spilde af de velsignede Ord, som dit angstfulde Hjærte udblødte? Jeg
tror, Du tilgiver mig, for den dobbelte Fryd, mit Svar nu voldte.

Mit Svar, som Du fik sort paa hvidt i Svaret til Forlæggeren.




XXVIII.


                                          _Slutningen af Januar._

Grethe havde aldrig spurgt mig om min Fortid, det Spørgsmaal, som
plejer at være det første, en Mand hører af sin Elskede. Jeg tænkte:
Skulde det skyldes Uvidenhed? Utvivlsomt ikke. Grethes Viden om
Livet var tydelig og klar. Hun talte uden Omsvøb om det, som unge
Piger ellers anser det for et Uskyldighedsbevis at rødme over.
Skulde det da maaske skyldes en altfor god Tro til mig?

Jeg vilde ingen Tvivl, intet Bedrag i det Punkt. Og jeg spurgte
hende idag.

Aldrig har jeg set Grethe saa overvættes lystig. Hun lo saa
hjærteligt, saa overgivent, at hun næsten ikke kunde holde op.
Omsider sagde hun: »Nej, Du er virkelig for morsom. Du spørger,
halvt fornærmet, om jeg anser Dig for at have levet, som de gamle
Damer i Stiftelsen lever. Nej, min Ven, Du kan berolige Dig. Du har
for tydeligt indskærpet Offenligheden dine Letsindigheder, til at
Nogen skulde tvivle om, hvilken forfærdelig Person Du er.«

Og hun lo atter, saa jeg blev ganske forvirret. Efterhaanden
genvandt hun sin Alvor og sagde -- vi gik i Skoven --: »Lad os sætte
os her paa Bænken, saa skal jeg forklare Dig Grunden til, at din
slemme Fortid aldrig har foruroliget mig, ja, at den tværtimod,
efter hvad jeg véd om den, yder mig Sikkerhed for, at Du nu først
føler det, jeg forstaar ved Kærlighed. Du kan bagefter sige mig, om
jeg har Ret eller Uret.

Først maa jeg tilstaa, at min Sikkerhed intet har at gøre med den --
vistnok af Mændene -- udbredte Mening, at en Mand bør anvende en Del
af sin Ungdom til at rase ud. Jeg tror ikke paa, at Jert Raseri er
saa stort, at I behøver det.

Nej, min Sikkerhed har en Grund, jeg selv har udspekuleret og som
jeg bilder mig ind er noksaa solid. Jeg har i alle dine Bekendelser
forgæves ledt efter _Barnet_. Mange begejstrede Ord har Du ødslet
paa at lovprise dine Elskerinders Dejlighed. Du har udstyret dem
med alle Fortrin. Kun ét nægtede Du dem: Berettigelsen til at føde
dine Børn. Maaske har det ikke været Dig bevidst. Ialfald synes det
mig, at Du ligefrem med Flid gaar udenom Børnespørgsmaalet, hvori
jeg ser al virkelig Kærligheds baade Begyndelse og Ende. Hvad kan
den Kvinde være en Mand værd, hvem han ikke ønsker at skænke Frugten
af sit Favntag? Det er dog det store Under, den Lykke over al Lykke
i Favntaget mellem Mand og Kvinde, at dér mødes deres Kærligheds
Evighedstrang, Trangen til at vide sig forenede ud i de fjærne Tider
gennem Børnene og atter disses Børn og saa fremdeles, til Dagenes
Ophør. Hvis jeg hvilede i dine Arme og jeg fornam din Vilje kølnes
af Frygten for Barnet, jeg vilde føle den dybeste Beskæmmelse. Jeg
vilde tænke: til en flygtig Lyst, et Sansernes hensigtsløse Behag
er jeg ham god. Men han værdiger ikke at lade mit Skød bære hans
Evighedstanke. -- Nu er jeg stolt og sikker, fordi jeg tror at vide,
at jeg er den første, hvem Du har ønsket at se som dine Børns Moder.
Og jeg nærer ingen Misundelse til din Fortid og de Kvinder, der
fylder den. Stakler, om de elskede Dig; thi deres Hjærter vil da,
selv under dine mest glødende Kærtegn og Smigerord, have følt Tomhed
og Skuffelse. I modsat Fald er de end ingen Beklagelse værd. De
fandt, hvad de søgte. De tog, ingen af dem, noget af den Lykke, din
Kærlighed forjætter mig.«

       *       *       *       *       *

»Har jeg saa« -- spurgte Grethe -- »haft Uret i ikke at foruroliges
af din Fortid?«

Men uden Ord knælede jeg ned og lagde mit Hoved i hendes Skød.




XXIX.


                                                       _Februar._

Det er, som Grethe siger. Det staar ikke vel til med hendes Fader.

Vi er komne under Vejr med, at han i den senere Tid flere Gange,
mens vi var ude, har listet sig over i Møllen. Vi fik Mistanke ved
hans forblommede Ord, og nu forleden saa' vi ham, da han gik derfra.
Han sneg sig bort som En, der er bange for at blive overrasket.
Drejede sagte Nøglen om og lyttede for hvert Skridt.

Vi har været inde i Møllen for at se, om vi kunde opdage, hvad han
foretog sig. Alt stod tilsyneladende urørt.

I Virkeligheden er der jo intet underligt i, om den gamle Mand kunde
føle Lyst til en Gang imellem at færdes i sin Mølle, der rummer
saamange Erindringer for ham. Det ængstende er kun den fordulgte
Maade, hvorpaa han aflægger sine Besøg, og den Omhu, hvormed han
søger at skjule dem for os. Samtidig kan han ikke lade være at sige
Ting, som røber ham.

En Dag, Grethe var gaaet ud af Stuen og han og jeg sad sammen i
Sofaen, rykkede han tæt hen til mig og hviskede: »De har nok lagt
Mærke til, at Grethe ikke holder af, at jeg kommer over til Møllen?
Har hun aldrig fortalt Dem Grunden? Naa ikke. Skal jeg sige Dem,
hvad jeg tror? Hun er bange, fordi jeg er gammel og blind. Hun
mener, at jeg ikke kan klare mig selv længer og at der kunde ske mig
en Ulykke. Grethe er saa omhyggelig for mig, hun er en god Datter
og jeg nænner ikke at gøre hende imod. Men havde jeg ellers noget
Ærind, fandt jeg vel Vej paa Vejrbakken og i Møllen saa godt som
nogen Ung med to karske Øjne.«

I det hele taget kredser hans Tanker sygeligt om Møllen. Det er ikke
blot i Nattens Drømme -- som Grethe, bekymret lyttende ved hans Dør,
har hørt --, at han fantaserer om den. Ogsaa ved højlys Dag spøger
den i hans Sind. Han taler om den som om et levende Væsen, der bærer
Nag til ham og som han frygter Hævn af.

Forgangen Aften sagde han til mig:

»Synes De ikke, at saadan en Mølle, der altid staar, er en underlig
Ting? Ja naturligvis, var den gammel og aflægs, blev det jo en anden
Sag. Men Møllen fejler ikke noget, den har sine Sager iorden baade
indvendig og udvendig. Og dens Bestemmelse her i Verden er dog at
gaa, saalænge dens Kræfter slaar til. Ser De, der er jo ogsaa noget
ydmygende i det, at Folk, som ikke véd bedre Besked og som ikke har
kendt den i de Tider, den var den raskeste Mølle paa Egnen, kunde
falde paa at tro, at den overhovedet ikke _kan_ gaa. Nej, jeg har
ikke handlet ret mod Møllen. Enten burde jeg afstaaet den til en
Yngre, da jeg selv blev gammel og træt, eller jeg burde have skudt
den som en Jagthund, hvis Herre ikke længer duer til at føre den paa
Mark og i Skov og ikke vil se den i nogen Andens Eje.«

Grethe, der var kommen ind og havde hørt de sidste Ord, gjorde et
Tegn til mig, og jeg sagde:

»Ja, Møller, jeg synes ogsaa, det er Synd for Møllen. De vilde gøre
vel imod den ved at rive den ned. Saa er den død og borte og faar
Fred, og De med.«

»Det bliver vel ogsaa dertil,« svarede Mølleren. »Ja, naturligvis,
det maa sagtens saa være. Men man gaar ikke til det med let Sind.
Man véd dog aldrig, om der ikke kunde være Gærning for den endnu en
Gang. Om ikke i min Tid, saa naar den nye Mand tager min Plads.«

»Jamen Fader,« indskød Grethe. »Den nye Mand er jo kommen, og han
har helleringen Brug for Møllen.«

»Nej, det er nok ogsaa sandt,« smilede den Gamle. »Den nye Mand har
selv ladet sin Mølle staa.«

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Men siden har Grethe og jeg talt om, at vi for enhver Pris maa
have hendes Fader til at tillade Møllens Nedrivning.




XXX.


                                               _Sidst i Februar._

Vi har besluttet at gifte os til Maj. Hvad har vi at vente paa? I
Møllerhuset er der Plads og Mad nok. Det lidet, vi mere behøver,
kan jeg vel digte mig til. Foreløbig skal Resthonoraret for min nye
Bog anvendes til Grethes Brudekjole. Hun skænder paa mig for min
Letsindighed, men jeg vil, at hun skal være den smukkeste og fineste
Brud, som den gamle By har sét. Bryllupet skal staa i Stiftelsens
lille landsbyagtige Kirke, og der maa ingen faa Adgang uden de gamle
Damer. Men vor Veninde og tre andre gode Jomfruer fra Stiftelsen
skal som Brudepiger følge Grethe til Alteret. Efter Vielsen drikker
vi et Glas Champagne med Brudefølget, men der skal ogsaa være sød
fransk Vin for dem, der foretrækker det. Naar vi saa kører hjem,
lader vi Vognen holde udenfor Kirkegaarden; thi Grethe vil lægge
sin Brudekrans paa Moders Grav, den, der forenede os. Og saa holder
vi vort Indtog paa Vejrbakken som Mand og Kone og flytter ind i
Møllerhusets øvre Etage, der har staaet tom og ubenyttet, lige
siden Grethes Moder døde. Det er Maj, Bøgen nys udsprungen, Luften
fuld af Blomsterduft, og i Vejrbakkens Skov synger Nattergalen sine
Elskovsmelodier.

Dagene rinder hastigt, mens Grethe og jeg lever vor store Lykke og
drømmer om den end større Lykke, der venter os, naar Foraaret kommer.

Om Morgenen gaar vi som Regel en lang Tur. Enten i Byens afsides
Gyder og Stræder, hvis Navne alene henflytter En til en fjærn Fortid
og hvoraf enkelte, fornemmeligst den ældgamle Peblingegyde, der i
Trappeafsatser bugter sig mellem faldefærdige Rønner og forvitret
Murværk, er saa snæver, at den maa passeres i Gaasegang. Eller vi
søger ud paa de høje, aabne Landeveje, hvor Blikket skuer vidt og
Tankerne drager paa Rejse ud i Fremtiden. Forfriskede af den kolde
Luft, varme og rødmussede af den gode Bevægelse vender vi saa hjem
til vort Arbejde. Jeg til min Bog, som nu skrider hastigt og sikkert
fremad. Grethe til sit Udstyr.

Der ligger fra Moderens Tid fuldt op i Kister og Skabe af Linned og
Dækketøj, stærke hjemmevævede Sager. Men Grethe vil ikke gaa som en
doven Brud til Brudesengen. Den skal klædes med Lagener, sømmede,
stukne og navnede af hende selv. Og som den skal hele Brudehuset
være. Symaskinen snurrer Dagen lang, og om Aftenen trædes Traaden,
mens jeg sidder hos og ofte bringer Forstyrrelse i Arbejdet ved at
kysse de kære travle Hænder.

En Aften finder jeg Grethe ilag med at klippe fint Lærred ud i
bittesmaa Stykker. Jeg sidder og bryder mit Hoved med, hvad det
vel skal blive til, og Grethe, der ser min Forundring, smiler
underfundigt. Endelig brister min Nysgærrighed, og jeg spørger: »Er
det Dig eller mig, der skal pyntes med det Dukketøj?«

»Nej,« svarer hun. »Det er vor Førstefødtes Skjorter.«

Halvt spøgende, halvt alvorligt siger jeg: »Pas paa, Barn, at ikke
dit altfor sikre Haab skuffes. Der blev vel ogsaa Tid nok siden at
ordne Sønnens Udstyr.«

Hun ser paa mig med Taarer i Øjnene: »Det maa Du ikke sige. Jeg vil
ikke tænke noget saa sørgeligt. Hvad Mening var der saa i al min
Kærlighed, om jeg ikke engang skulde kunne føde Dig en Søn? Og din
Søn skal ikke komme til et fattigt og uforberedt Hjem. Han skal
hellerikke bære Klæder, købte i Boder, fremmede Klæder, hvori ingen
Tanke om ham gemmes. Derfor syer jeg hans Tøj nu, mens jeg er rask
og har Kræfter til det. Hvordan det bliver siden, kan man aldrig
vide. Skulde det saa end hændes, at jeg døde fra ham, vil Du dog,
naar han bliver stor nok til at fatte det, kunne fortælle ham, at
hans Moder havde sørget for ham, saavidt hun formaaede. Og han vil
aldrig føle sig ganske moderløs.«

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- »Saa er Du ikke vred paa mig og synes ikke, jeg er overspændt,
ejheller altfor tillidsfuld? Hvilken Gud skulde misunde en Kvinde
den Lykke at drage Omsorg for det Barn, hun gærne ofrer Livet for at
føde?«

Dette sagde hun, da hun i den mørke Aften stod ude paa Vejrbakken
og rakte mig Haanden til Godnat. Jeg drog hende ind til mig og
hviskede: »Du bedste af alle Mødre.«




XXXI.


                                                      _8. Marts._

Det er nu bestemt, at Møllen skal rives ned. Den Gamle har givet sit
Samtykke, om fjorten Dage tages der fat paa Arbejdet. Efter først
endelig at have fattet sin Beslutning synes Mølleren beroliget.
Saavidt vi kan skønne, har han i den sidste Tid end ikke aflagt
Smugbesøg i Møllen.

Beslutningen om Møllens Nedrivning har bragt Ro over os alle.
Uden at ville tilstaa det for hinanden gik Grethe og jeg begge i
Ængstelse for, at en Ulykke skulde ske. Hvor let kunde det ikke
hænde, naar den gamle blinde Mand færdedes alene i Møllen, at han
snublede paa en af de stejle Trapper, styrtede igennem en Luge eller
kom galt afsted med Hjulværket? Grethe har nu tilstaaet det: ofte
naar hun afslog en Spadseretur under Foregivende af Travlhed med
Udstyret, var det Frygt for at forlade Faderen, der holdt hende
hjemme.

Nu er alt trygt og godt som før. Og om Aftenen sidder vi og drøfter,
alle tre, hvad Volden skal bruges til, naar Møllen er borte. Den
Gamle mener, at, da Møllen hidtil har tjent mange Skippere som
Sømærke, bør han tilbyde Grunden til Oprejselse af et andet let
iøjnefaldende Mærke. Men Grethe hævder, at mange andre Punkter paa
Vejrbakken egner sig ligesaa godt dertil; at Volden er deres egen og
at Ingen kan fortænke dem i, at de indretter den til deres Behag.
Hun og jeg har en Plan, som vi haaber at faa hendes Fader til at
bifalde.

Paa Volden vil vi bygge et Lysthus i antik Tempelstil. Rundt om det,
paa Voldgangen, planter vi en Krans af skærmende Graner, men op om
Templet og dets Søjler skal i Tidens Løb vild Vin og vilde Roser og
Kaprifolier slynge sig. Og paa dets Frontespice fæster vi i gylden
Skrift Indvielsens Ord: _Til Vejrbakkens Gud_.

Vejrbakkens Gud, Fredens Gud, vor Lykkes Gud vil vi bygge vort
Blomster-Tempel, vort Olymps idylliske Parnas. Her vil vi sidde og
skue vidt over Land, lade Verden støje under os, høre Stormen suse
og Uvejret knitre om os og alle Dage, i Storm som i Stille, skærmes
af Fredens milde Paulun. Her vil vi sidde, mens vi er unge og Roser
og Vin og Kaprifolier ranker sig om vore Hjærter; her vil vi ogsaa
sidde, naar de gamle Aar kommer og Mindernes Duft ombølger os. Herop
vil vi føre vore Børn, mens de er smaa, og lære dem at bøje Knæ for
vor Gud, og her vil vi vente dem, naar de, prøvede i Livets Kamp,
søger Hvile i Barndomshjemmets Tempel. Men allerdejligst synes vi,
det vil være -- vi smiler ad vore Drømmes ufortrødne Flugt --, naar
den Dag kommer, da vor Søn og hans Brud tager vor Plads mellem Roser
og Kaprifolier.

I Fællesskab bygger vi vort Tempel. Men den Dag, Templet er rejst og
vi staar sammen deroppe, vil jeg fortælle Grethe, hvordan jeg, alt
før jeg kendte hende, og længe før jeg vidste, jeg elskede hende,
tilbad hende som Fredens Gudinde og af Møllen byggede hende et
Højalter.




XXXII.


                                                     _19. Marts._

Foraaret kommer tidligt iaar. De sidste otte Dages lune Regn og
bagende Sol har allerede bragt Skovbundens Blomster til at pible
frem af det brune Løvdække, har allerede vakt Fuglesangen foroven.

Det er lige efter Solopgang, da jeg imorges henter Grethe til vor
Spadseretur. Morgensolen har kaldt paa mig, jeg nænnede ikke at sove
de dejlige Timer bort. Og jeg staar fløjtende udenfor Møllerhuset,
hvor alt endnu er lukket. Et Gardin rulles op, og Grethe kommer til
Syne i hvid Natdragt, med det rige brune Haar frit nedhængende og
glimtende gyldent i Solen. Hun nikker smilende til mig og sender mig
et Godmorgen saa fornøjet, at hele Luften fyldes med Glæde. Men da
jeg tænker paa, at denne livstraalende Ungdom er min og at om en
føje Stund dette frodige hvide Legeme skal hvile i mine Arme og være
min Hu til Vilje, svimler det for mig.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vi gaar i Skoven og drikker Foraarets stærke Vin, som Solen perser
af tusind gærende Safte. Jeg ser Blodet stige i Grethes Kinder, jeg
hører det banke i hendes Haand, som jeg holder i min. Foraarets Rus
er i os, dens liflige Døsighed gyder sig gennem vore Aarer. Grethe
bøjer sig ind til mig, træt søger hun, med Hovedet lænet mod min
Skulder, Støtte ved min Arm, og hun siger sagte:

»Hører Du den samme Sang som jeg?«

»Hvilken Sang hører Du?«

»Der er Stemmer, som higende kalder, og der er Stemmer, som vigende
lokker. De leger med hinanden, snart klagende fjærnt, snart
sukkende nær; snart spørgende og svarende, snart flydende sammen
i et jublende Møde af alle Toner ... Jeg synes, det er Naturens
Bryllupssang, der lyder om os. Hører Du den ikke ogsaa?«

»Jeg hører Naturen kalde til Fest: Frem alle Blomster, syng alle
Fugle, spring ud alle Træer. Stat tidligt op, smyk Jer og øv Jer.
Vaaren er kommen alt nu, at I kan være rede. Thi naar Majdag rinder,
staar Vejrbakkens Prinsesse Brud. -- Jeg hører Naturen synge dit
Bryllup ind.«

       *       *       *       *       *

Vor Vej standses af en Bæk, der ellers risler med sparsomt Vand
mellem store Stene, men som Vaarbruddet har ladet svulme over alle
Bredder. Kun hist og her rager en Sten op.

»Vi maa vel vende om?« spørger jeg.

Grethe læner sig ømt til mig: »Jeg er saa foraarsdoven,« siger hun.
»Jeg vil nødig gaa en Omvej. Tror Du ikke nok, Du kan bære mig?«

Hun slaar sine Arme om min Nakke, jeg løfter den store Pige, og jeg
staar med hende ude i Bækken. Jeg føler hendes bløde Legeme tæt mod
mit, hendes varme Aande i mit Ansigt. Jeg mærker ingen Byrde, men
atter svimler det for mig. Jeg maa tage al min Vilje sammen for ikke
at styrte med hende.

... Saa sidder vi, begge lidt forpustede, paa Bænken hinsides
Bækken. Men Grethe lægger sit Hoved til mit og hvisker i mit Øre:

»Du, min stærke Brudgom. Saa dejligt jeg havde det i dine Arme.«

       *       *       *       *       *

Foraaret kommer tidligt iaar. Der kimer Bryllupsklokker i Naturen.
Brudefolkene længes mod Bryllupets Dag.


                                                     _21. Marts._

Jeg har faaet mine Papirer fra Hovedstaden, de Attester, uden hvilke
man ikke bliver gift, selv ikke paa Vejrbakken. Jeg ser, at jeg i
min Alders første Aar blev kokoppeindpodet og at Podningen »slog
an«. Himlen være lovet. Ellers havde jeg formodenlig ikke faaet
Tilladelse at indtræde i Ægtestanden.

Imorgen eller i Overmorgen begynder Nedrivningen af Møllen. Den
Gamle var i helt godt Humør iaften.




XXXIII.


                                                     _22. Marts._

Grethe er imorges kommen til Skade oppe ved Møllen. Lægen giver
ganske godt Haab.


                                              _Samme Dags Aften._

Der var nok blæst en stærk Storm op inat. Jeg synes forresten ikke,
det blæste noget videre, da jeg gik op til Møllen, men jeg tænkte jo
hellerikke saa meget paa Vejret.

Da jeg fra Skoven naaede ud til Bakkekammen, ser jeg Grethe staa
oppe paa Møllevolden mellem Vingerne, akkurat som første Gang, jeg
saa' hende paa Vejrbakken. Saa er Arbejderne altsaa ikke komne
endnu, tænkte jeg. Det var maaske ogsaa for tidligt. Og jeg tænkte
videre, at Grethe sagtens var gaaet derop for at tage Afsked
med Møllen. Hun saa' mig ikke, hun stirrede ud over Fjorden. Jeg
svingede med Hatten, jeg kaldte paa hende. Hun hørte mig ikke, hun
stod i dybe Tanker. Og Blæsten har vel ogsaa baaret imod.

Pludselig gav det et Ryk i Vingerne. Jeg tror nok, jeg udstødte
et Skrig. Enten har hun hørt mit Skrig, eller hun har selv mærket
Faren. Hun drejede Hovedet, vore Blikke mødtes, hun gjorde en
Bevægelse som for at styrte frem, i det samme Sekund faldt hun
lydløst til Jorden, ramt af den ene Vinge. Og den næste Vinge fulgte
efter, hen over hendes Legeme, og den næste. Rundt og rundt, i
stigende Fart, gik Vingerne, henover Grethe. Jeg tænkte, mens jeg
løb: Du er bleven forstyrret i Hovedet, det er Svimmelhed, alt gaar
rundt for Dig. Men saa saa' jeg jo, at Grethes Legeme ikke skiftede
Plads.

Paa den anden Side af Møllen, ligefor Voldtrappen, fandt jeg Grethes
Fader. Han stod og gjorde et Tov fast. Han smilede saa underligt.
Den Tanke fo'r mig gennem Hovedet: han har i Sindssyge dræbt sin
Datter. En vanvittig Tanke. Jeg anede i det samme alt. Jeg sagde
i Forbifarten roligt: »Grethe er bleven ramt af Vingerne.« Da jeg
naaede hen til hende, stod Møllen atter. Hendes Fader havde vel
standset den. Jeg laa bøjet over hende, hun rørte sig ikke. Hun var
helt hvid i Ansigtet, men jeg saa' ikke Saar eller Blod. Jeg kaldte
paa hende, jeg blev ved at nævne hendes Navn. Saa aabnede hun sine
Øjne og smilede, lukkede straks Øjnene igen, men Smilet blev om
hendes Mund. Hun havde sét mig og hun smilede! Aa Gud, aa Gud! hun
var ikke død.

En Hulken lød bag mig og en rystende Haand famlede paa min Skulder.
Det var den Gamle. »Hun lever!« sagde jeg. »Men vi maa have hende
baaret ind.« -- Jeg saa' op; lidt borte stod tre, fire Arbejdere i
en Klynge med brave medlidende Øjne. De trængte sig stille frem for
at hjælpe. Og en af dem sagde: »Der er gaaet Bud efter Læge.«

Vi bar hende ind, og Lægen kom.

Hendes Tilstand er iaften uforandret. Hun ligger bevidstløs hen.
Slaget har ramt hende paa den højre Side af Hovedet. Der er kun
en Skramme og nogen Hævelse at se. Men Lægen frygter enten en
Hjærnerystelse eller et Brud.

       *       *       *       *       *

Min Anelse om Ulykkens Aarsag bekræfter sig. Grethes Fader vilde en
sidste Gang, inden den blev revet ned og bragtes til evig Ro, lade
Møllen gaa. Ved sine hemmelige Besøg derovre havde han forvisset sig
om, at Maskineriet var i Orden. Han er imorges gaaet tidligt op til
Møllen, har rimeligvis været inde i den, da Grethe kom. Under Larmen
af den stærke Blæst har hun ikke hørt hans Puslen hverken derinde
eller da han gik ud paa den modsatte Side. Saa har han trukket
Persen fra, i samme Nu satte Stormen Møllen i Gang og Ulykken skete.

Saameget har jeg kunnet slutte af de faa Ord, han har sagt.
Han sidder mest hen i stum Fortvivlelse. Det er en Ynk at se.
Pinefuldere næsten end at dvæle ved Grethes stille Sygeleje.
Men da Arbejderne kom og spurgte, om de saa skulde begynde
Nedbrydnings-Arbejdet, sagde han, at de kunde gaa. Han vilde sende
Bud efter dem, naar han behøvede dem.




XXXIV.


                                                     _24. Marts._

Hun er død. Min Grethe, min kære Pige er død.

Vi vidste jo hele Dagen igaar, at der intet Haab var. Feberen og
Vildelsen begyndte om Natten, og Lægen gik om Morgenen uden at sige
noget. Jeg kunde ikke spørge. Jeg forstod, det var overflødigt.

Jeg har siddet hos hende og maattet tvinge Smil og Glæde frem i mit
Ansigt. Hun troede, hun laa til Sengs, fordi hun havde født vort
Barn. Hun var saa lykkelig, men en Gang imellem græd hun, fordi hun
ikke maatte have Barnet hos sig. Og naar jeg ikke smilede, blev hun
ganske fortvivlet, jamrede sig og sagde, at vi løj for hende: at
Barnet var død eller røvet fra hende. I de Øjeblikke blandede ogsaa
Møllen uhyggelige Forestillinger ind i hendes Fantasier. Hun troede,
at hendes Fader havde bragt Barnet op til Møllen, og bad mig saa
bønligt hente det tilbage.

Ud paa Aftenen tog Feberen til. Lægen kom, men gik hurtigt igen. Jeg
talte ikke med ham. Jeg sad atter ved Grethes Seng, hun kendte mig
ikke. Hun laa mest med lukkede Øjne, mumlede uhørlige, forvirrede
Ord og fortrak Ansigtet i Smerter. Jeg syntes næsten, det var bedre
saadan. Jeg behøvede jo ikke at skjule min Sorg, jeg kunde holde
hendes stakkels hede Haand i min og græde.

Pludselig slog hun Øjnene, store og klare, op.

»Græder Du, fordi jeg skal dø?« spurgte hun.

Jeg sank ned paa Gulvet og lagde mit Hoved i hendes Puder. Hun strøg
sin Haand nedover det, mildt og længe. Saa sagde hun:

»Du maa ikke græde for min Skyld. Jeg har det saa godt. Det er ikke
slemt at dø. Baade din og min Moder kalder paa mig: de smiler saa
kærligt til mig; de viser mig, at der er Plads til mig imellem dem.«

En mørk Skygge gled over hendes Blik. Hun rejste sig op i Sengen:
»Barnet! Hvor er Barnet? Det er Synd af Dig at lade mig vente saa
forfærdelig længe!«

Saa faldt hun tilbage, hendes Øjne var atter klare, men store Taarer
trængte sig frem.

»Min egen Ven,« sagde hun, »læg dit Hoved tæt til mit. Der er noget,
jeg vil sige Dig, nu mens jeg véd rigtig Besked med alt og inden jeg
dør.«

Jeg gjorde, som hun bad, og hun hviskede:

»Jeg er ikke bange for at dø, men jeg synes, det er saa sørgeligt,
at jeg skal herfra, før jeg har født Dig den Søn, jeg havde lovet
Dig. Nu er det saa lidt, Du har som Minde om mig, saalidt at takke
mig for. Jeg gav Dig jo kun mig selv en stakket Stund. Og knap nok
det gjorde jeg. Nej, Du maa ikke afbryde mig og ikke sige mig imod;
jeg maa have Lov at sige det altsammen, som jeg føler det. Jeg
bebrejder mig, at jeg lod Dig vente. Jeg syntes vel, det var Dig,
der skulde bede. Du skal vide, at alt, hvad Du havde bedt om, havde
jeg givet Dig. Du skal vide, at hin Formiddag i Skoven, da vi hørte
Bryllupssangen tone om os, var jeg af mit ganske Hjærte, af hele
min Længsel din Brud. Og det vil jeg, uden at rødme, sige Gud paa
hans Trone, at jeg gik grædende fra Jorden, fordi jeg ikke naaede at
hvile som Brud i dine Arme.«

»Nu er det Tid,« sagde hun lidt efter, »at Du henter Fader herind.«

Men da hun havde kysset den Gamle, bad hun om at maatte sove,
smilede til mig, lukkede sine Øjne og slog dem ikke mere op.




XXXV.


                                                     _Løst Blad._

Foraaret gaar sin Sejrsgang op over Vejrbakken, med stort Følge af
glade Mennesker nede fra Byen. Unge og Gamle, Børn og Kærestefolk,
værdige Mænd og Matroner, ja selv værkbrudne Stakler -- alle skal de
med at se Vaaren paa Vejrbakken.

       *       *       *       *       *

Strøende gylden Sol for alle Vinde fører Foraaret an, og de glade
Mennesker fra Byen udpeger beundrende for hinanden dets stolte
Bedrifter.

»Alt staar Hækken i Knop, og i Vejkanten blomstrer Violer. Pluk mig
et Par, jeg vil fæste dem ved mit Bryst.«

»Nej, kære, pas dog paa, at Du ikke træder paa Sneglen. Og se
Sommerfuglene dér, den ganske gule og den røde med de sorte Pletter.
Herregud, lad dem flagre i Fred, lad dem nyde Foraaret ligesom vi.«

»Hørte I Stæren, Børn. Og Pipfuglen hist. Den flyver med Straa til
sin Rede.«

       *       *       *       *       *

Toget standser ved Pavillonen, som Foraaret har vakt af sin Dvale;
hvor, Vinteren igennem, kun en enlig Fremmed har været Gæst.

»Lad os drikke et Glas for Vaaren. For Vaaren og Livet. For Livet og
Glæden.«

»Hvad I ikke spiser, Børn, strø det for Spurvene. Vi maa ikke glemme
Vinterens Fugle, fordi Foraaret er kommet.«

       *       *       *       *       *

De glade Mennesker fra Byen følger Foraaret videre, op gennem Skoven.

»Saa lifligt her dufter af Muld og Gran. Men gaa ikke i Græsset, det
har regnet i Nat.«

»Jo, i Græsset maa jeg. Jeg har fundet en blaa Anemone. Og de hvide
dér. Hvormange der er, naar man ret ser efter.«

»Og tænk Bøgen. Saa store Knopper den alt har. Tro mig, den springer
ud før Maj, hvis dette Foraar varer ved.«

»Vist varer det ved. Spørg blot Fuglene, der jubler. De véd Besked.«

       *       *       *       *       *

Foraaret staar triumferende paa Vejrbakkens Kam, og de glade
Mennesker udbryder i høje Fryderaab:

»Helt herop er Vaaren naaet. Møllevolden er klædt med nyt Græs,
og Vingerne skinner som Guld i Solen. I Møllerens Have knoppes
Frugtblomsterne, i en Stue vilde de hastigt udfolde sig. Hvem der
turde bryde en Gren!«

Da aabnes Døren til Møllerhuset, en klam Luftning gaar hen over
de glade Mennesker: paa sit hvide Leje hviler en ung Kvinde, kold
og bleg. Og ved hendes Side staar en Mand, den Fremmede paa
Vejrbakken. Hans Øjne græder ikke, de har ingen Taarer fler. Han
siger, bøjet over sin kolde, blege Brud: »Vaaren er død.«




XXXVI.


                                                     _30. Marts._

Idag er Grethe bragt til Hvile paa Kirkegaarden.

I Stiftelsens Kirke forrettedes Andagten. Dér sad alle de gamle
Kvinder og græd uhyklede Taarer over Grethe, fordi hun, der havde
bragt Ungdom og Skønhed ind i deres falmede Hjærter, var gaaet bort
midt i sin unge Glæde. Paa hendes Kiste havde de lagt Kranse, bundne
med deres egne rystende Hænder, Kranse af Vedbend og Mos, prydede
med Evighedsblomster og troskyldige Farvel-Indskrifter i sorte og
hvide Perler. Og saa sang de nu for hende, der havde sunget for dem,
sang med deres spinkle, brustne Stemmer: »Tænk, naar en Gang den
Taage er forsvunden.« Aa Gud, aa Gud. Her var det, hun havde glædet
sig saa inderligt til at skulle staa Brud, her, hvor hun nu laa i
sin Kiste, en Dødens Brud, klædt i det Lin, hun selv havde sømmet og
syet til sin Fest. -- Mit trætte, forpinte Hoved sank ned ved min
gamle Venindes Bryst. Hun klappede mig og talte til mig som til et
bedrøvet Barn, saadan som hun saamange Gange i svundne Dage havde
trøstet mig og kælet for mig. Baade hun og jeg glemte nok, at jeg nu
var en stor og klog Mand. Jeg syntes, jeg havde det godt ved hendes
enfoldige Bryst; jeg syntes, Sorgen mildnedes, mens hun hviskede:
»Saa maa det da være saa skønt for ham at tænke paa, at hun ikke
skal ligge alene, men skal ud til hans Mo'r. De to vil tale saameget
godt og kærligt om ham, det kan han være forvisset om, og hænder der
ham nogen stor Fortræd eller Modgang, saa vil han fornemme, hvordan
de trøstende omsvæver ham.«

-- Præsten, den stærke Kirkens Svøbe over den gamle Bys
Vankundighed, traadte frem ved Grethes Kiste. Han saa' prøvende
strængt ud mod Forsamlingen, men, som om han uvilkaarligt forstod,
at her ved denne unge Piges Kiste, overfor disse grædende gamle
Kvinder og denne haardt ramte Fremmede, her var Strænghed
Helligbrøde, saa gød sig et Skær af bevæget Menneskelighed over hans
skarpe Træk, og da han begyndte at tale, skælvede hans Stemme:

»Jeg kendte ikke den unge Kvinde, hvem Gud tog bort, just som hun
troede at staa ved den største Jordelykkes Indgang. Men der er mig
om hende intet fortalt uden Godt og Skønt. Hun synes ad egne Veje
paa det høje ensomme Sted, hun boede, at have fundet Fred med Gud og
Verden. Hun synes ogsaa at have haft Evne til at meddele Andre Fred.
Jeg kender ikke dem, der er hendes Nærmeste og hvem hendes Død blev
saa tungt et Slag. Jeg véd ikke, om deres Sorg har søgt den Trøst,
jeg kalder den ene rette. Men mit Hjærte krymper sig i deltagende
Forstaaelse af deres Smerte. Jeg beder Gud skænke hende og dem sin
Fred. Amen.«

Alene med Præsten vandrer jeg henover Kirkegaarden bag Grethes
Kiste. Jeg ser, hvordan Foraaret har begyndt at brede sin Pynt over
Døden. Jeg ser Foraarets Blomster og jeg hører i mit Øre genlyde
Præstens Ord om Guds Fred. Og min Sjæl skriger i Kval: »Du lyver
Præst, ligesom Foraaret paa Gravene lyver. Alverdens Blomster kan
ikke dække den Dødens Gru, at hun, jeg elskede, skal ædes af Ormene.
Alverdens Præster kan ikke lade opstige til mig af Graven den Guds
Fred, som for evigt jordedes med hende.«

Kisten er sænket i Graven, Jordpaakastelsen til Ende, Præsten har
trykket min Haand -- jeg er ene.

Men først rigtig ene dog, da jeg, kold og rystende af at sidde
stille saalænge i den skarpe Foraarsluft, forlader mine Grave og
gaar op paa Vejrbakken, der nu end ikke huser Grethes tomme Ler.

Saa ene, saa ene.




XXXVII.


                                                         _April._

Jeg flygtede jo hertil for at søge Ensomheden. Jeg fandt den. Og om
Grethe ikke var kommen paa min Vej, havde sikkert Ensomheden ikke
skræmmet mig. Thi jeg havde da ikke kendt det Savn, der nu jager mig
som en Fredløs.

En Fredløs er jeg i min Ensomhed. Hvor finder jeg den Krog, som kan
yde mig Fristed? Enten jeg flakker om i den gamle Bys øde Gader
eller jeg løber min Fod træt paa Vejrbakkens stejle Veje, overalt
følger Savnet mig som en graadig Ravn, skrigende hæst i mit Øre,
parat til at hugge sit Næb i mit Hjærte. Der er ikke den Plet,
ikke det Hus, det Træ, der ikke raaber mig mit Savn imøde. »Husk,
sidst Du var her, kom Du med _hende_! Nu er Du alene, hun følger
Dig aldrig mere.« »Her sad Du med hende. I talte om Eders Lykke, I
drømte Jer ud i Fremtiden; alt, hvad I talte, tænkte og drømte, var
Sommer og Sol, idel Liv og Lyst. Nu ligger hun i Jorden, Drømmen har
Dødens kolde Pust splittet.«

Jeg har søgt Freden i Bibliotekets Klostersal, hvis højtidsfulde
Stilhed før dulmede mit Sind til god Hvile i gamle Minder. Men
Ravnen sad paa min Skulder: »Du unge Munk, hvi dvæler dit Blik
saa længselssygt ved Træet derude bag Muren? Bliv kun, hvor Du
er. Dig venter ingen længer, naar Mørket falder over Klosteret. I
Klosterhaven er Nattergalene forstummede. Og i det gamle Træ bygger
Ravnen Rede.«

I Kildehaven har jeg været, jeg tør ikke komme der mer. Jeg syntes
Børnene blev stille, da de saa' mig. Jeg læste i deres Øjne
bedrøvede Spørgsmaal: »Hvor er hun henne, hun, som altid før var med
Dig og som holdt saameget af os? Du maa ikke komme alene, Du skal
hente hende.«

Min Veninde i Stiftelsen sørger over min Troløshed. Netop nu vilde
hun saa gærne vise mig sin Hengivenhed. Hun forstaar det ikke og
jeg nænner ikke at sige hende det: mit saarede Hjærte taaler ikke
de medlidende Blikke, som det maa løbe Spidsrod igennem, saasnart
jeg er indenfor Stiftelsens Porte; som forfølger mig paa Trapper og
i Gange, helt op til hendes Dør, og som modtager mig i hendes egen
Stue, fra hendes egne trofaste Øjne.

Men mest hjærteskærende er det dog at besøge Grethes Fader. At
færdes i de Stuer, som hun fyldte med sin Fred og sin Ynde; hvor
Savnet klager som et forpint Dyr under hvert Skridt, man træder;
hvor Luften endnu skælver af hendes Dødssuk; hvor endelig han
sidder, den gamle Mand, og stirrer med den blinde Skæbnes tomme
Øjne paa det Frygtelige, han har fuldbragt. Hvad har han og jeg
at sige hinanden, som kan bringe Trøst? Han hører næppe nok de
Fornuftbetragtninger, hvormed jeg forsøger at møde hans Selvanklage
og hans forvirrede Udtalelser om Grethes Ulykke som den forurettede
og vrede Mølles Hævn. Er jeg derimod selv ganske upaavirket af hans
sære Grublerier? Eller er det alene Mindet om hin forfærdelige
Morgen, der vækker Uhygge i mit Sind og faar mig til at skælve, naar
jeg passerer Møllen? Endnu ligger den der, endnu har dens Herre ikke
villet fælde Dommen over den.

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Men naar Savnet har jaget mig fredløs fra Sted til Sted,
søger jeg Hvile i mit Arbejde, i min Bog. Mens jeg skriver paa den,
glemmer jeg, at Grethe er død. I den lever hun, i den genopstaar
hun med den Guds Fred, som hun skænkede mig, da jeg kom som en træt
Flygtning til Vejrbakkens Ensomhed.




XXXVIII.


                                           _Sidste Dage i April._

Jeg havde Lyst at skrive en Fortale til min Bog, som nu er
færdig. Rigtignok bandlyser den moderne literære Katekismus
Fortaler saavelsom de gamle fortrolige Henvendelser midt i Bogen
fra Forfatteren til hans kære Læser. Et af de første Bud lyder:
Forfatteren maa aldrig stikke sin Person frem og ikke give sin
private Mening til Kende. Forfatteren objektiverer sig i Værket, der
har at tale for sig.

At vise Humbugen heri skulde bl. a. være Hensigten med min Fortale.
Har en Forfatter noget paa Sinde overfor sine Læsere, skal han nok
faa dem det sagt trods Katekismens Forbud. Han lader bare en af
Personerne holde et lille Foredrag. Og hvad nytter det, man forbyder
ham personlig at optræde i sine Bøger? De allerfleste Bøger skrives
om Forfatterne selv. Følgen af Forbudet mod de umaskerede sorte
Dominoer bliver da blot, at Forfatterne kostymerer sig mer eller
mindre smagfuldt, mer eller mindre gennemskueligt. Tag en af vore
Forfatteres samlede Produkter for Dem, og De vil se ham paradere
forbi i en Række skiftende Forklædninger: som Præst og som Læge,
som Ingeniør og som Adelsmand; snart det overlegne Fornuftmenneske,
snart en dybsindig Grubler; snart en barnlig Fantast og snart en
fortvivlet Oprører mod Samfundsordenen. Den naive Mand bilder sig
ind, at han er vel forvaret i sin sindrige Forklædning. Men ikke
blot hans Kaldsfæller, der kender Fiffene, skriver ham straks leende
i Haanden. Ogsaa Læserne, dresserede af den moderne kritiske Metode,
hvis Stolthed det netop er at »finde Katten«, udpeger ham med
Lethed og siger henrykte til hinanden: Har I set den skævbenede Hr.
A.... nu optræder han min Salighed som en uimodstaaelig Ingeniør?
Hvad mener I om den evigglade Hr. B., er han ikke grinagtig, naar
han giver Partiet som den verdensforagtende Naturforsker?

Forklædningen narrer Ingen anden end -- Forfatteren. Han tænker:
siden jeg nu en Gang skal i Kostyme, vil jeg dog gøre mig akkurat
saa prægtig, som jeg dog nok egenlig er. Hvilket latterlig glimrende
Galleri af Selvportræter udviser ikke den moderne Literatur. Hvor
har Forfatterne ikke svælget i at afmale sig som Ynglinge med
dejlige Aasyn, med slanke, elegante Skikkelser, med ildfulde blaa
eller brune Øjne eller Øjne, der betagende skifter i alle Farver.
Eller de har set sig selv i moden Manddom, med Alvor og Myndighed
i det viljestærke Blik, med graanende, men endnu fyldige Lokker. I
kærlig Overbærenhed retoucherer de bort alle Maver og Maaner, alle
Latterligheder og Grimheder. Og hænder det en sjælden Gang, at de,
ved at se sig i Spejlet, faar en Anelse om, at en vis Beskedenhed
maaske vilde være passende, slaar det ikke fejl, at de Svagheder
eller Mangler, de med ædel Oprigtighed vedkender sig, stilles i
en flatterende Belysning af en Ejendommelighed, der overgaar al
sædvanemæssig Skønhed. Eller de tager yderligere Oprejsning for
de koket tilstaaede legemlige Skavanker ved at gøre de aandelige
Fortrin, der aldrig fattes en Forfatters Selvfremstilling, end mere
overvældende.

Saaledes ser vi da vore Forfattere, som Ofre for
Forklædnings-Humbugen, udlevere sig til Spot for en lattermild
Samtid.

Det fik endda være. Værre er det, at Forklædningen hæmmer
Forfatteren i at sige sit Hjærtes usminkede Mening. Maskeradebøgerne
fordrer en pinagtig Hensyntagen til æstetisk Vedtægt, der føles
som Humbug, fordi Forfatteren véd, hvad den er »gjort af«. Vi
kender alle den moderne Romanformel: et første Kapitel, hvor vi
springer badus ud i Handlingen, og et andet Kapitel, hvor vi hales
i Land af en lang og kedsommelig Forhistorie, som Forfatteren
møjsommeligt har sammenstillet til Baggrund for sin Maskerade.
Alle disse Udenomssysler med Garderobe, Maskineri, Dekorationer
og med Personer, der skal agere imod hinanden efter en stereotyp
Kapitel-Regie, suger Marven af den Energi, som skulde gøre Bogen
til et helt og ægte Udtryk for de Oplevelser, Stemninger og
Følelser, der har født den i Forfatterens Sjæl. Kunstletheden og
Kunstfærdigheden kvæler den Hjærtets simple, enfoldige Tilstaaelse,
som det var Bogens Mening at gøre andre Hjærter, der har levet og
følt noget lignende.

Derfor har jeg fortalt min Bog saa lige ud, som jeg har levet den.
Derfor er det »jeg«, der selv henvender mig til Læserne. »Jeg« er
hverken smuk eller grim, hverken en velskabt Trubadur eller en
dæmonisk Pukkelryg. »Jeg« er kun et Hjærte med Trang til at synge
sin Fryd og sin Kvide. »Kostymet« passer sagtens til de store
Bøger, der skildrer Samfundets Maskerade. Hjærtets smaa Bøger
skrives bedst af den, der ikke forsøger at være andet end »jeg«.




XXXIX.


                                                     _30. April._

Jeg har sluttet min Bog; jeg har sluttet alt, hvad her var for mig
at virke.

Iaftes, da jeg paa det sidste Blad havde lukket Grethes Øjne med et
Afskedskys og det tomme hvide Papir laa foran mig, da forstod jeg,
at nu kom først ret de ensomme Dage paa Vejrbakken. Og jeg stod op,
samlede alle Ting sammen, pakkede min Kuffert og lod min Vært vide,
at jeg rejser med Skibet imorgen.

Hvad jeg vil? Først og fremmest bort herfra. Men dernæst didhen,
hvor Arbejdet venter mig. Træt, fordi det syntes mig at føre
til intet, opgav jeg det. Jeg genoptager det, uden altfor store
Indbildninger, men følende, at det i hvert Fald har sit Værd i
sig selv. Hvilen giver kun de Lykkelige Fred. For os andre dulmer
Arbejdet Ulykken.

Lad mig desuden tilstaa det. Naar jeg i disse sidste Tider af og
til, for at søge en Smule Adspredelse, har gæstet en af Byens Kaféer
og dér faaet et Blad ihænde, er der vaagnet i mig en kriblende Lyst
til atter at føre en Pen for eller imod det, jeg læste. Jeg fornam,
at min Mølle ikke var standset anderledes, end at en Smule Vind
kunde sætte den i Bevægelse. Og jeg syntes, jeg begyndte at forstaa
Grethes Fader. Ikke Møllen, men ham var det, der trængte til at
høre Hjulene snurre og Vingerne suse. I hans eget Indre var det, at
Anklagen mod Hvilen lød. Jeg syntes, jeg forstod endnu mere. Jeg
hørte Varselraabet: Ve den, der i Blinde lader Møllen gaa!

Idag har jeg været rundt at tage Afsked. Med Byen, med Vejrbakken,
med alt det, der for mig gemmer Livets lyseste og bitreste Minder.

Jeg har sagt min Veninde i Stiftelsen Farvel. Hendes Trofasthed
overgav jeg Grethes Grav i Værn og Varetægt. Thi jeg véd, at den
gamle Møller ikke kommer der før den Dag, han selv bringes derud
til evig Hvile. Jeg sagde til min Veninde: »Smyk ikke Graven med
de forgængelige Blomster, dem, hvis Trøst er en stakket pralende
Løgn; dæk den med det altid levende Mindes beskedne Vækster, med
Vedbend og Evighedsblomster.« Min Veninde gav grædende sit Løfte:
»Hendes Grav skal staa smykket, som han vil det, saalænge Gud lader
mig leve. Og falder jeg fra, vil de Andre herinde gøre, som jeg har
gjort. Den Tid blot En er tilbage, der har set hendes velsignede
Ansigt, skal hendes Grav ikke forfalde, det kan han stole paa.«

Hos Grethes Fader var jeg. Jeg fandt ham mere meddelsom end ellers
siden Ulykken. Efterretningen om min Afrejse syntes intet Indtryk
at gøre paa ham. Hvad var jeg vel ogsaa for ham uden i Forbindelse
med Grethe? Han fortalte mig, at han havde fæstet den gamle Kone,
der før gik til Haande i Huset, til at bo hos sig og passe ham.
For ham var der da sørget, det, han behøvede. Om at flytte fra
Vejrbakken vilde han ikke høre Tale. Mindre nu end nogensinde. Thi
nu -- fortalte han mig videre -- var det »i Orden« med Møllen.
Istedetfor at rive den ned havde han indrettet den til et Sørgeminde
over Grethe. Alt Maskineriet havde han ladet hugge isønder, og,
naglede fast til Bygningen, stod Vingerne som et oprejst Kors ud
mod Fjorden. »Hverken den eller jeg« -- sagde han -- »kan nu gøre
mere Fortræd her i Livet. Vi bliver her sammen paa det Sted, hvor
vi forbrød os. Og saa er det jo min Tanke, at Møllen, naar jeg dør,
skal gives i Arv og Eje som Sømærke og nævnes paa Kortet som Grethes
Minde.«

Jeg gik fra Møllerhuset gennem Haven. Den stod i sin fejre
Foraarspragt, men det skønnedes tydeligt, at Ingen længer tænkte paa
at røgte den. Græsset paa Plænerne groede vildt og uslaaet, i Bedene
voksede Ukrudt frodigt mellem Blomsterne. Jeg forudsaa den Dag,
hvor den vilde forfalde til Vildnis og dernæst atter blive et Bytte
for den golde Vestenvind. Kærlighedens og Fredens milde Haand var
vegen fra Vejrbakkens Oase.

Tilsidst var jeg paa Kirkegaarden. Hos hende, der var min
Barndoms Sol og hos hende, der lod denne Sol genlyse en kort, men
uforglemmelig Dag over min Manddom.

I to gode Mødre, sov i Fred ved hinandens Side paa min gamle Bys
Kirkegaard.

-- -- Min Kuffert er pakket. Men øverst i den ligger en af de smaa
Skjorter, Grethe syede til vor Søn.




XL.


                                                _1. Maj. Ombord._

Skibet gled ud af Havnen, forbi Slottet med den hverdagsagtige graa
Façade, udenom Brohovedet, hvor min gamle Veninde stod og viftede
Farvel. Bag mig laa nu Byen, smilende rød mellem foraarsgrønne
Marker og Bakker, med munter Røg fra alle Skorstene og med
Storkeknebren over Tagene. Langsomt blegnede den i Aftenens Dis.
Skibet svingede om en Pynt, forsvunden var Byen.

Jeg vaagnede, som om Tæppet var gaaet ned for et Skuespil, i hvis
fjærne Drømmeverden jeg for en kort Stund havde levet. Da fulgte
Skibet en ny Drejning af Fjorden, og et eneste Øjeblik saa' jeg, ude
i Horisonten, Vejrbakkens Top og øverst oppe Møllen som et sort
Kors paa hvid Grund.

Saa er den gamle By uigenkaldelig borte. Og jeg vender tilbage,
derfra jeg kom. Til gamle Venner og gamle Fjender.

Har da dette Aar været forgæves, er det sporløst svundet som den
Æventyrets Drømmeverden, for hvilken Teatrets Tæppe ruller ned?

Visselig ikke. Det har bragt mig den _Treuga Dei_, hvorefter den
ganske Jord sukker, den Guds Fred, som selv vore krigeriske Fædre
undte hinanden, den livsalige Forsoning med sig selv og Andre, der
lutrer Sjælen og ædler Viljen. Jeg drager tilbage, hvorfra jeg kom,
men ikke som den samme. Jeg har, hvad jeg manglede før, et højt og
sikkert Mærke for min Sejlads: Grethes Minde. Mine Venner vil maaske
modtage mig med et medlidende Skuldertræk, mine Fjender maaske sende
mig et hoverende Smil. De vil erfare, at der er Grund hverken til
Medynk eller Glæde. Den Guds Fred, der har rørt min Sjæl, har ikke
haft Brug for nogen Omvendelse; det Sømærke, mit Liv har vundet,
fører mig ikke i nogen ny Retning. Blot følger jeg nu sikrere en
ligere Vej.

Paa dit Dødsleje, Grethe, bebrejdede Du Dig, at Du døde som Jomfru
i mine Arme. Jeg tvivlede ingensinde om din redebonne Gavmildhed.
Jomfru eller Ikke-Jomfru, Du var bleven den samme. Jeg véd ogsaa,
at ingen Salighed vilde været større end at hvile som Brudgom ved
din Side. Men Du, min Jomfrubrud, har lært mig Forsagelsens hidtil
ukendte Lykke. Du har lært mig Lykken ved at være paa Vej til
Lykken, selv om man aldrig naaer den.

Jeg sætter atter Møllen i Gang. Det maa saa være. Den kræver sin Ret
af min Ungdom og mine Evner. Og jeg tænker paa, at den Møllevinge,
der dræbte Dig, maaske ikke fortjener Forbandelse. Langt snarere
handlede den maaske mildt og godt, da den i Blinde tog Dig bort,
inden den forfærdelige Stund oprandt, da jeg, uden at _ville_ se,
satte i Gang min Mølle, ved hvis Vinger Du havde søgt Hvile.
»Grethes Minde« har lært mig at se mig for.

Min Drøm er til Ende. I Foraarsnatten bærer Skibet mig tilbage fra
min gamle By til Virkeligheden og Arbejdet. Drømmen er til Ende,
Guds Fred udrunden, Grethe død.

Eller var det ingen Drøm? Eller drømmer jeg endnu? Jeg synes at
fornemme, mens jeg skriver dette, Grethes Haand paa min Skulder, at
høre hende hviske i mit Øre:

Guds Fred udrinder aldrig for den, der elsker.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Guds Fred, by Peter Nansen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUDS FRED ***

***** This file should be named 43295-8.txt or 43295-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/2/9/43295/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gu